
# The Astral

## 1: Davis (1847) 109 [0.9939]

>δ 14. In a wheel, there is but one centre: so at this Focus, there is but one Principle, one united attribute of Goodness and Truth. If it were possible for a circle to have several centers, then it would be possible for various principles and truths, both good and evil, to emanate from this Source. But as the first is impossible in a particular sense, so the other is positively impossible in a general sense. As the sun stands as an emblem of this great truth, you cannot resist the impression of its positive analogy. The sun produces light: it cannot produce darkness. It is a focus for the universal diffusion of light, and this it sends forth to the extreme sphere of its existence. So this Centre is a Focus for the universal diffusion of Knowledge, Truth, and one unchangeable principle, as disseminated to the extreme sphere of its positive power or existence. The focus of this existence is but an indefinite expansion of the Great Focus, passing from general positive to general negative existence —and being the controlling power of this existence, even as the Great Focus governs all existences. To this centre—to this focus —to the great positive power of this sphere (which is an effect or ultimate) —to this great actuator and propeller, consisting of one principle, which is Goodness without distinction —I go to receive information! And as the mind generates thought by coming in contact with external exciting causes in the natural body; so this Mind* creates in my mind parallel ideas which I term impressions. And by the minute yet existing medium between the mind and the body, I arrive back to convey the impressions through the natural organization.
## 2: King (1987) 683 [0.9839]

>‘The consciousness then seems to pass through the symbol to realms beyond it: probably visions and pictures from other planes come on to the hypersensitive brain centres. The sensation is as if looking at a series of moving pictures, and although there are beings with whom one can converse and animals one can dominate, there is no more solidity than in a cinema film. In time, however, the sensitivity of the brain increases, and one gains the power of actually going to the scenes of the visions and seeing them as three dimensional — indeed, one actually becomes capable of doing things in the vision and producing effects upon it. This is what is technically known as ‘Travelling in the Spirit Vision’ and whether it is more than an extension of the power of seeing the moving pictures on the Sphere of Sensation (the akashic envelope) is difficult to determine. The stages of Travelling in the Spirit Vision are as follows: —
## 3: Davis (1847) 118 [0.9819]

>It is impossible for any one to enter voluntarily that state in which he can view with clearness things belonging to a sphere of existence higher than the natural world. Were such a thing to take place, that moment death would necessarily and inevitably ensue. For this state cannot be entered without a loss of one of the controlling forces of the system; and if this force is not supplied by the system of another, the natural functions of the organization would cease, and the spirit could not re-enter it after it had once departed. Independent clairvoyance, therefore, must be induced by the action of another system, by which the positive power is extracted from the subject. To sustain life, this is supplied sympathetically by the system of the operator; and so long as this is the case, there is a rare and subtle medium of sympathy existing between the mind and the body, by which the former finds its way back to the latter after a temporary absence. If this medium were destroyed, the mind could not return; and it is impossible to go voluntarily into the independent state of clairvoyance without destroying it.
## 4: King (1987) 678 [0.9819]

>‘The readiest way is the use of symbols. These produce visions in the physical brain and make it more sensitive. A large number of well-known symbols have a definite relationship to certain portions of the Sphere of Sensation, the corresponding regions of the Cosmos, and the related regions of the physical brain.
## 5: King (1987) 112 [0.9793]

>In all these cases ideas and visions are produced in the brain by the symbol, and if the above theory be accepted it follows that the effect of the symbol is to render one portion of the physical brain more sensitive, or it may be more translucent, so that the images lying within the corresponding region of the Sphere of Sensation may be dimly perceived (such sensitiveness of brain may be produced in other ways, such as by Hypnotism or self-induced Trance, by Obsession, Disease, etc. — but the method by symbol seems to remain the surest and the best).
## 6: King (1987) 113 [0.9793]

>A large number of well known and recognised symbols have a definite relation to certain portions of the Sphere of Sensation and the corresponding regions of the Cosmos, and also to the regions related thereto of the physical brain.
## 7: King (1987) 122 [0.9793]

>Whether it is more than an extension of the power of perceiving the pictures on the Sphere of Sensation or Akashic envelope is very difficult to determine. The sensation, however, to me personally is first to become, as it were, dimly conscious of a figure walking among the scenes of the new country — or the Astral Plane — gradually to become conscious that it is my own figure I am looking at — gradually, as it were, to be able to look through the eyes — and feel with the sensations of this doppel ganger. Further to be able consciously to direct its motions, to control it, to inhabit it, and in this body to be able to visit the scenes and persons I had previously only looked at, as it were, through a telescope.
## 8: King (1987) 684 [0.9793]

>‘It is as though consciousness was extruded from one’s own body and taken over a body either created for the purpose or invoked out of the astral sphere. It seems probably that as the Sphere of Sensation reflects everything on the physical plane it contains a reflection of the material body of the percipient. If this is so it would follow that the body could be made to travel within the Sphere of Sensation and visit all things reflected therein.
## 9: Blavatsky (1889) 185 [0.976]

>Theo. It may be so in your modern Christian and even Scientific catechism; it is not so for unbiassed minds. The Egyptians revered the "One-Only-One," as Nout; and it is from this word that Anaxagoras got his denomination Nous, or as he calls it, Nous autokrates, "the Mind or Spirit Self-potent," the archetes kinedeos, the leading motor, or primum-mobile of all. With him the Nous was God, and the logos was man, his emanation. The Nous is the spirit (whether in Kosmos or in man), and the logos, whether Universe or astral body, the emanation of the former, the physical body being merely the animal. Our external powers perceive phenomena; our Nous alone is able to recognise their noumena. It is the logos alone, or the noumenon, that survives, because it is immortal in its very nature and essence, and the logos in man is the Eternal Ego, that which reincarnates and lasts for ever. But how can the evanescent or external shadow, the temporary clothing of that divine Emanation which returns to the source whence it proceeded, be that which is raised in incorruptibility?
## 10: Blavatsky (1889) 359 [0.976]

>4. Taijasi means the radiant in consequence of its union with Buddhi; i. e., Manas, the human soul, illuminated by the radiance of the divine soul. Therefore, Manas-taijasi may be described as radiant mind; the human reason lit by the light of the spirit; and Buddhi-Manas is the revelation of the divine plus human intellect and self-consciousness. (return to text)
## 11: King (1987) 109 [0.976]

>The reason, then, why we have not such knowledge consciously to ourselves must be from the obtuseness of the Sensorium, the actual physical brain, which cannot perceive the images on the sphere of sensation. If, then, all knowledge lies ■within each man’s own sphere, it is by looking within, or intuition, that such knowledge is made available.
## 12: King (1987) 124 [0.976]

>The Perception of the Astral plane seems to be peculiarly liable to delusions, arising probably from defects in the sensorium or physical brain — as an object seen through faulty glass is distorted, that is to say the personal element, or what scientists call the ‘personal equation’, becomes so strong as to produce actual error.
## 13: King (1987) 193 [0.976]

>There are then these four aims — Spiritual Development — extension of the powers of perception; learning the modes of Divination and becoming familiar with the vibratory mode of pronouncing Divine Names. To these may be added the practical study of the particular influences of colour and 1 thus we are called Lords of the Path of the Chameleon.
## 14: Blavatsky (1888) 2164 [0.9644]

>305 Fetahil is identical with the host of the Pitris, who “created man” as a “shell” only. He was, with the Nazarenes, the King of Light, and the Creator; but in this instance he is the unlucky Prometheus, who fails to get hold of the Living Fire necessary for the formation of the Divine Soul, as he is ignorant of the secret name, the ineffable or incommunicable name of the Kabalists.
## 15: Blavatsky (1889) 225 [0.9644]

>Theo. A soul which pleads to be allowed to remain where she is, must be pre-existent, and not have been created for the occasion. In the Zohar (vol. iii., p. 61), however, there is a still better proof. Speaking of the re-incarnating Egos (the rational souls), those whose last personality has to fade out entirely, it is said: "All souls which have alienated themselves in heaven from the Holy One — blessed be His Name — have thrown themselves into an abyss at their very existence, and have anticipated the time when they are to descend once more on earth." "The Holy One" means here, esoterically, the Atman, or Atma-Buddhi.
## 16: Davis (1847) 27 [0.9644]

>A knowledge of the natural laws which govern society should have been before understood; but the sources of knowledge which exist in the world have been perverted from their legitimate object and use. Institutions for the diffusion of knowledge are founded on an artificial basis. It is the interest of every institution to confine its knowledge to itself; whereas, it should be both the principle and interest of all such to cause their knowledge to become universal. Moreover, people who have not the capacity to comprehend the sciences, should not be educated for, and compelled to hold situations, where such knowledge is absolutely required.
## 17: Denis (1838) 117 [0.9644]

>" Whenever I wish it," says Cardan, f< I come out of my body so as to feel no sensation whatever, as if I were in ecstacy. When I enter this state, or, more properly speaking, when I plunge myself into ecstacy, I feel my soui issuing out of my heart, and, as it were, quitting it as well as the rest of my body through a small aperture formed at first in the head, and particularly in the cerebellum. This aperture, which runs down the spinal column, can only be kept open by very great efforts. In this situation, I feel nothing but the bare consciousness of existing out of my own body, from which I am distinctly separated. But I cannot remain in this state more than a very few moments.
## 18: King (1987) 110 [0.9644]

>Know thyself and thou wilt know everything. But seeing that the brain and sensorium are physical, it is necessary at first to use physical means to produce the sensitiveness necessary to consciously perceive the images on the Sphere of Sensation. And the readiest and safest means is the use of a symbol. This is familiar in everyday life, but so much so as to escape notice.
## 19: King (1987) 677 [0.9531]

>‘Thus everything is pictured in each man’s Sphere of Sensation, or akashic envelope. If he is conscious of the picture as reflected he will be possessed of all knowledge. Initiation makes such knowledge possible and available.
## 20: Blavatsky (1888) 665 [0.9313]

>One of the explanations of the real though hidden meaning of this Egyptian religious glyph is easy. The crocodile is the first to await and meet the devouring fires of the morning sun, and very soon came to personify the solar heat. When the sun arose, it was like the arrival on earth, and among men, of the “divine soul which informs the Gods.” Hence the strange symbolism. The mummy donned the head of a crocodile to show that it was a Soul arriving from the earth.
# Astral Light

## 1: Blavatsky (1888) 237 [1e-04]

>The Pythagorean Monas is also said to dwell in solitude and “Darkness” like the “Germ.” The idea of the Breath of Darkness moving over “the slumbering Waters of Life,” which is Primordial Matter with the latent Spirit in it, recalls the first chapter of Genesis. Its original is the Brâhmanical Nârâyana (the Mover on the Waters), who is the personification of the Eternal Breath of the unconscious All (or Parabrahaman) of the Eastern Occultists. The Waters of Life, or Chaos—the female principle in symbolism—are the vacuum (to our mental sight), in which lie the latent Spirit and Matter. This it was that made Democritus assert, after his instructor Leucippus, that the primordial principles of all were atoms and a vacuum, in the sense of space, but not of empty space, for “Nature abhors a vacuum,” according to the Peripatetics and every ancient philosopher.
## 2: Levi (1856) 313 [1e-04]

>The metals which correspond to the four elementary forms are gold and silver for the air, mercury for water, iron and copper for fire, lead for earth. Talismans are composed from these, relative to the forces which they signify and to the effects which it is designed to obtain from them. Divination by the four elementary forms, respectively known as seromancy, hydromancy, pyromancy, and geomancy, is performed after various manners, which all depend on the will and the translucid, or imagination, of the operator. In fact, the four elements are only instruments which assist second sight. Now, second sight is the faculty of seeing in the astral light, and it is natural as the first or sensible and ordinary sight, but it can only operate by the abstraction of the senses. Somnambulists and ecstatics enjoy second sight naturally, but this sight is more lucid when the abstraction is more complete. Abstraction is produced by astral intoxication, that is, by an excess of light which completely saturates, and hence stupefies, the nervous system.
## 3: Blavatsky (1888) 1583 [1e-04]

>At this moment, when the theory of mere motion as the origin of all varieties of force is again becoming the prevailing thought, it were almost heresy to reöpen a debate, which for a period appears, by general consent, to be virtually closed; but I accept the risk, and shall state, therefore, what were the precise views of the immortal heretic, whose name I have whispered to the readers, (Samuel Metcalfe,) respecting Sun‐Force. Starting with the argument on which nearly all physicists are agreed, that there exist in nature two agencies—matter which is ponderable, visible, and tangible, and a something which is imponderable, invisible, and appreciable only by its influence on matter—Metcalfe maintains that the imponderable and active agency which he calls “caloric” is not a mere form of motion, not a vibration amongst the particles of ponderable matter, but itself a material substance flowing from the sun through space, filling the voids between the particles of solid bodies, and conveying by sensation the property called heat. The nature of caloric, or Sun‐Force, is contended for by him on the following grounds:
## 4: Blavatsky (1888) 259 [1e-04]

>Yet they all made a difference between the good and the bad Serpent (the Astral Light of the Kabalists)—between the former, the embodiment of divine Wisdom in the region of the Spiritual, and the latter, Evil, on the plane of Matter. For the Astral Light, or the Ether, of the ancient Pagans—the name Astral Light is quite modern—is Spirit‐Matter. Beginning with the pure spiritual plane, it becomes grosser as it descends, until it becomes Mâyâ, or the tempting and deceitful Serpent on our plane.
## 5: Blavatsky (1888) 695 [1e-04]

>(a) “When the One becomes Two, the Three‐fold appears”: to wit, when the One Eternal drops its reflection into the region of Manifestation, that reflection, the Ray, differentiates the Water of Space; or, in the words of the Book of the Dead: “Chaos ceases, through the effulgence of the Ray of Primordial Light dissipating total darkness, by the help of the great magic power of the Word of the [Central] Sun.” Chaos becomes male-female, and Water, incubated by Light, and the Three‐fold Being issues as its “First‐born.” “Ra [or Osiris‐Ptah] creates his own Limbs [like Brahmâ], by creating the Gods destined to personify his phases,” during the Cycle. The Egyptian Ra, issuing from the Deep, is the Divine Universal Soul in its manifested aspect, and so is Nârâyana, the Purusha, “concealed in Âkâsha, and present in Ether.”
## 6: Blavatsky (1888) 963 [1e-04]

>Ether—this hypothetical Proteus, one of the “representative fictions” of Modern Science, which, nevertheless, was so long accepted—is one of the lower “principles” of what we call Primordial Substance (Âkâsha, in Sanskrit), one of the dreams of old, which has now again become the dream of Modern Science. It is the greatest, as it is the boldest, of the surviving speculations of ancient philosophers. For the Occultists, however, both Ether and the Primordial Substance are realities. To put it plainly, Ether is the Astral Light, and the Primordial Substance is Âkâsha, the Upâdhi of Divine Thought.
## 7: Levi (1860) 29 [1e-04]

>How is all this possible? Because there is a composite agent, a natural and divine agent, at once corporeal and spiritual, an universal plastic mediator, a common receptacle for vibrations of movement and images of form, a fluid and a force which may be called, in a sense at least, the imagination of Nature. By the mediation of this force every nervous apparatus is in secret communication together; hence come sympathy and antipathy, hence dreams, hence the phenomena of second sight and extra-natural vision. This universal agent of Nature’s works is the _Od_ of the Jews and of Reichenbach, the Astral Light of the Martinists, which denomination we prefer as the more explicit.
## 8: Blavatsky (1888) 264 [1e-04]

>All the Kabalists and Occultists, Eastern and Western, recognize (a) the identity of “Father‐Mother” with Primordial Æther, or Âkâsha (Astral Light); and (b) its homogeneity before the evolution of the “Son,” cosmically Fohat, for it is Cosmic Electricity. “Fohat hardens and scatters the Seven Brothers”; which means that the Primordial Electric Entity—for the Eastern Occultists insist that Electricity is an Entity—electrifies into life, and separates primordial stuff or pregenetic matter into atoms, themselves the source of all life and consciousness. “There exists a universal agent unique of all forms and of life, that is called Od, Ob, and Aour, active and passive, positive and negative, like day and night: it is the first light in Creation” (Éliphas Lévi)—the “first light” of the primordial Elohim, the Adam, “male and female,” or (scientifically) Electricity and Life.
## 9: Blavatsky (1888) 824 [1e-04]

>When creation [evolution] took place, the Yliaster divided itself; it, so to say, melted and dissolved, developed out of [from within] itself the Ideos or Chaos (Mysterium Magnum, Iliados, Limbus Major, or Primordial Matter). This Primordial Essence is of a monistic nature, and manifests itself not only as vital activity, a spiritual force, an invisible, incomprehensible, and indescribable power, but also as vital matter of which the substance of living beings consists. In this Limbus or Ideos of primordial matter, ... the only matrix of all created things, the substance of all things is contained. It is described by the ancients as the Chaos ... out of which the Macrocosmos, and afterwards, by division and evolution in Mysteria Specialia, each separate being came into existence. All things and all elementary substances were contained in it in potentiâ but not in actu.
## 10: Blavatsky (1888) 1627 [1e-04]

>Herein lies the nucleus of error leading to all the resultant mistaken views. This “Nervous Ether” is the lowest principle of the Primordial Essence which is Life. It is Animal Vitality diffused in all Nature, and acting according to the conditions it finds for its activity. It is not an “animal product,” but the living animal, the living flower and plant, are its products. The animal tissues only absorb it according to their more or less morbid or healthy state—as do physical materials and structures (in their primogenial state, nota bene)—and, from the moment of the birth of the Entity, are regulated, strengthened, and fed by it. It descends in a larger supply to vegetation in the Sushumnâ Sun‐Ray which lights and feeds the Moon, and it is through her beams that it pours its light upon, and penetrates man and animal, more during their sleep and rest, than when they are in full activity. Therefore Dr. Richardson errs again in stating that:
## 11: Blavatsky (1888) 1922 [1e-04]

>But it is time to leave Modern Physical Science and turn to the psychological and metaphysical side of the question. We would only remark that to the “two very reasonable postulates” required by the eminent lecturer, “to get a glimpse of some few of the secrets so darkly hidden” behind “the door of the Unknown,” a third should be added—lest no battering at it should avail; the postulate that Leibnitz stood on a firm groundwork of fact and truth in his speculations. The admirable and thoughtful synopsis of these speculations—as given by John Theodore Mertz in his “Leibnitz”—shows how nearly he has brushed the hidden secrets of Esoteric Theogony in his Monadologie. And yet this philosopher has hardly risen in his speculations above the first planes, the lower principles of the Cosmic Great Body. His theory soars to no loftier heights than those of the manifested life, self‐consciousness and intelligence, leaving the regions of the earlier post‐genetic mysteries untouched, as his ethereal fluid is post‐planetary.
## 12: Blavatsky (1888) 2271 [1e-04]

>895 And how can it be otherwise? Gross ponderable matter is the body, the shell, of Matter or Substance, the female passive principle; and this Fohatic Force is the second principle, Prâna—the male and the active. On our globe this Substance is the second principle of the septenary Element—Earth; in the atmosphere, it is that of Air, which is the cosmic gross body; in the Sun it becomes the Solar Body and that of the Seven Rays; in Sidereal Space it corresponds with another principle, and so on. The whole is a homogeneous Unity alone, the parts are all differentiations.
## 13: Blavatsky (1888) 1613 [1e-04]

>Why either the Ether of Space or “Nervous Ether” should “destroy the individuality of every sense,” seems incomprehensible to one acquainted with the real nature of that “Nervous Ether” under its Sanskrit, or rather Esoteric and Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that:
## 14: King (1987) 358 [1e-04]

>Yetzirah is the Astral Light, which is especially the medium wherein operate the Ethers of the Elements under the presidency of the Planets: I use the expression Ether of the Elements in order to convey the significance of the Hermetic conception of the ‘Elements’. The Elements of the ancients (called respectively Fire, Water, Air and Earth) are not at all the physical Elements but the subtle Ethers underlying these, — the presence of which is necessary before the gross Elements can be manifested. Hence the Altar symbolism.
## 15: Blavatsky (1888) 767 [1e-04]

>It is through this Force that all the nervous centres secretly communicate with each other; from it—that sympathy and antipathy are born; from it—that we have our dreams; and that the phenomena of second sight and extra‐natural visions take place.... Astral Light [acting under the impulsion of powerful wills] ... destroys, coagulates, separates, breaks, gathers in all things.... God created it on that day when he said: “Fiat Lux!” ... It is directed by the Egregores, i.e., the chiefs of the souls, who are the spirits of energy and action.
## 16: Blavatsky (1888) 873 [1e-04]

>The Astral Light of the Kabalists is by some very incorrectly translated “Ether,” the latter is confused with the hypothetical Ether of Science, and both are referred to by some Theosophists as synonymous with Âkâsha. This is a great mistake.
## 17: Blavatsky (1888) 875 [1e-04]

>It is vacuity, no doubt, especially for Rationalists. At any rate Âkâsha is sure to produce vacuity in the brain of a Materialist. Nevertheless, though Âkâsha is certainly not the Ether of Science—not even the Ether of the Occultist who defines the latter as one of the principles of Âkâsha only—it is as certainly, together with its primary, the cause of sound, a psychical and spiritual, not a material cause by any means. The relations of Ether to Âkâsha may be defined by applying to both Âkâsha and Ether the words used of the God in the Vedas, “So himself was indeed (his own) son,” one being the progeny of the other and yet itself. This may be a difficult riddle to the profane, but very easy to understand for any Hindû—even though not a Mystic.
## 18: Blavatsky (1888) 1468 [1e-04]

>When an Occultist speaks of Fohat, the energizing and guiding Intelligence in the Universal Electric or Vital Fluid, he is laughed at. Withal, as now shown, the nature neither of electricity, nor of life, nor even of light, is to this day understood. The Occultist sees in the manifestation of every force in Nature, the action of the quality, or the special characteristic of its Noumenon; which Noumenon is a distinct and intelligent Individuality on the other side of the manifested mechanical Universe. Now the Occultist does not deny—on the contrary he will support the view—that light, heat, electricity and so on are affections, not properties or qualities, of Matter. To put it more clearly: Matter is the condition, the necessary basis or vehicle, a sine quâ non, for the manifestation of these Forces, or Agents, on this plane.
## 19: Blavatsky (1888) 1533 [1e-04]

>Therefore Spiller, with all his mistakes, exhibits more intuition than does any other modern Scientist, with the exception, perhaps, of Dr. Richardson, the theorist on “Nerve‐Force,” or Nervous Ether, also on “Sun-Force and Earth‐Force.” For Æther, in Esotericism, is the very quintessence of all possible energy, and it is certainly to this Universal Agent (composed of many agents) that are due all the manifestations of energy in the material, psychic and spiritual worlds.
## 20: Blavatsky (1888) 1633 [1e-04]

>The Archæus is of a magnetic nature, and attracts or repulses other sympathetic or antipathetic forces belonging to the same plane. The less power of resistance for astral influences a person possesses, the more will he be subject to such influences. The vital force is not enclosed in man, but radiates [within and] around him like a luminous sphere [aura] and it may be made to act at a distance.... It may poison the essence of life [blood] and cause diseases, or it may purify it after it has been made impure, and restore the health.
# Kabbalistic Tarot

## 1: Levi (1856) 162 [1e-04]

>In archaic writings preceding the Captivity, the Hebrew tau was cruciform, which further confirms our interpretation of the twelfth plate of the Kabbalistic Tarot. The cross, which produces four triangles, is also the sacred sign of the duodenary, and on this account it was called the Key of heaven by the Egyptians. So Etteilla, confused by his protracted researches for the conciliation of the analogical necessities of this symbol with his own personal opinion, in which he was influenced by the erudite Court de Gebelin, placed in the hand of his upright hanged man, by him interpreted as Prudence, a Hermetic caduceus, formed by two serpents and a Greek tau. Seeing that he understood the necessity for the tau or cross on the twelfth leaf of the book of Thoth, he should also have seen the multiple and magnificent meaning of the Hermetic hanged man, the Prometheus of science, the living man who makes contact with earth by his thought alone, whose firm ground is heaven, the free and immolated adept, the revealer menaced with death, the conjuration of Judaism against Christ, which seems to be an involuntary admission of the secret divinity of the Crucified, lastly, the sign of the work accomplished, the cycle terminated, the intermediary tau, which resumes for the first time, before the final denary, the signs of the sacred alphabet.
## 2: Levi (1856) 145 [1e-04]

>By the help of this purely dogmatic explanation we shall already understand the kabbalistic alphabet of the Tarot. Thus, Figure I., entitled the Buffoon, represents the active principle in the economy of divine and human autotelia. Figure II., vulgarly called Pope Joan, represents dogmatic unity based upon numbers, and is the personification of the Kabbalah or the Gnosis. Figure III. represents divine Spirituality under the emblem of a winged woman, holding in one hand the apocalyptic eagle, and in the other the world suspended from the end of her sceptre. The other emblems are equally clear, and can be explained as easily as the first. Turning now to the four suits, namely, Clubs, Cups, Swords, and Circles or Pantacles, commonly called Deniers all these are hieroglyphics of the tetragram. Thus, the Club is the Egyptian Phallus or Hebrew jod ; the Cup is the cteis or primitive he ; the Sword is the conjunction of both, or the lingam, represented in Hebrew preceding the captivity by vau ; while the Circle or Pantacle, image of the world, is the Tie final of the divine name. Now let us take a Tarot and combine all its emblems one by one into the Wheel or EOTA of William Postel ; let us group the four aces, the four twos, and so on, together ; we shall then have ten packs of cards giving the hieroglyphic interpretation of the triangle of divine names on the scale of the denary, as previously tabulated. By referring each number to its corresponding Sephira, we may then read them off as follows : mrr
## 3: Levi (1856) 491 [1e-04]

>Hieroglyph, THE POPE, or grand hierophant. In more modern Tarots this sign is replaced by the image of Jupiter. The grand hierophant, seated between the two pillars of Hermes and of Solomon, makes the sign of esotericism, and leans upon a cross with three horizontals of triangular form. Two inferior ministers kneel before him. Having above him the capitals of the two pillars, and below him the two heads of the assistants, he is thus the centre of the quinary, and represents the divine pentagram, giving its complete meaning. As a fact, the pillars are necessity or law, the heads liberty or action. A line may be drawn from each pillar to each head, and two lines from each pillar to each of the two heads. Thus a square, divided by a cross into four triangles, is obtained, and in the middle of this cross is the grand hierophant, we might almost say like
## 4: Levi (1856) 506 [1e-04]

>the Apocalypse of St John is a kabbalistic book the sense of which is rigorously indicated by the numbers of the Urim, Thummim, Theraphim, and Ephod, which are all resumed and completed by the Tarot ; the old sanctuaries have no longer mysteries, and the significance of the objects of the Hebrew cultus is for the first time comprehensible. Who does not perceive in the golden table, crowned and supported by cherubim, which covered the ark of the covenant, the same symbols as those of the twenty-first Tarot key ? The ark was a hieroglyphical synthesis of the whole kabbalistic dogma ; it included the jod or blossoming staff of Aaron, the he, or cup, the gomor containing the manna, the two tables of the law an analogous symbol to that of
## 5: Levi (1856) 508 [1e-04]

>Saint Martin, in his Natural Table of the Correspondences between God, Man, and the Universe, followed, as we have said, the division of the Tarot, giving an extended mystical commentary upon the twenty-two keys, but he carefully refrained from stating whence he derived his plan, and from revealing the hieroglyphics on which he commented. Postel shewed similar discretion, naming the Tarot only in a diagram of the key to his arcana, and referring to it in the rest of his book under the title of the Genesis of Enoch. The personage of Enoch, author of the primeval sacred book, is in effect identical with that of Thoth among the Egyptians, Cadmus among the Pho3nicians, and Palamedes among the Greeks. We have obtained in an extraordinary manner a sixteenth century medal, which is a key of the Tarot. We scarcely know whether to state that this medal, and the place where it was deposited, were shown us in dream by the divine Paracelsus ; in any case, the medal is in our possession. On one side it depicts the juggler in a German costume, of the sixteenth century, holding his girdle
## 6: Levi (1856) 445 [1e-04]

>We see from this rabbinical table, which John Belot and others borrowed from the Hebrew kabbalists, that these ancient masters concluded a posteriori from facts to presumable influences, which is completely within the logic of the occult sciences. We see also what diverse significations are included in the twenty-two keys which form the universal alphabet of the Tarot, together with the truth of our assertions, when we say that all secrets of the Kabbalah and magic, all mysteries of the elder world, all science of the patriarchs, all historical traditions of primeval times, are enclosed in this hieroglyphic book of Thoth, Enoch, or Cadmus.
## 7: Levi (1856) 144 [1e-04]

>We have now to concern ourselves with the Tarot from the kabbalistic point of view, and have already indicated the occult source of the name. This hieroglyphic book is composed of a kabbalistic alphabet, and of a wheel or circle of four decades, distinguished by four symbolical and typical figures, each having for its radius a scale of four progressive figures, which represent Humanity : man, woman, youth, child master, mistress, knight, esquire. The twenty-two figures of the alphabet represent, in the first place, the thirteen dogmas, and secondly, the nine beliefs authorised by that Jewish religion which is so strong and so firmly established in the highest reason.
## 8: Levi (1856) 148 [1e-04]

>The ten Sephiroth and the twenty-two Tarots form what the kabbalists term the thirty-two paths of absolute science. With regard to particular sciences, they distinguish them into fifty chapters, which they call the fifty gates among Orientals the word gate signifies government or authority. The rabbins also divided the Kabbalah into Bereschit, or universal Genesis, and Mercavah, or the chariot of Ezekiel ; then by means of a dual interpretation of the kabbalistic alphabets, they formed two sciences, called Gematria and Temurah, and so composed the notary art, which is fundamentally the complete science of the Tarot signs and their complex and varied application to the divination of all secrets, whether of philosophy, nature, or the future itself. We shall recur in our twentieth chapter to this work,
## 9: Levi (1856) 483 [1e-04]

>The learned Gaffarel regards the teraphim of the Hebrews, by means of which they consulted the oracles of the urim and thummim, as the figures of the four kabbalistio animals, which symbols, as we shall presently show, were summed up in the sphinxes or cherubs of the ark. In connection with the usurped Teraphim of Michas, he cites a curious passage from Philo, which is a complete revelation as to the ancient and sacerdotal origin of our TAROTS. Gaffarel thus expresses himself : " He (Philo the Jew), speaking of the history concealed in the before-mentioned chapter of Judges, says that Michas made three images of young boys and three young calves, three also of a lion, an eagle, a dragon, and a dove, all of fine gold and silver ; so that if any one sought him to discover a secret concerning his wife, he interrogated the dove ; concerning his children, the young boy ; concerning wealth, the eagle ; concerning strength and power, the lion ; concerning fecundity, the cherub or bull; concerning length of days, the dragon." This revelation of Philo, though depreciated by Gaffarel, is for us of the highest importance. Here, in fact, is our key of the tetrad, and here also the images of the four symbolical animals found in the twenty-first key of the Tarot ; that is, at the third septenary, thus repeating and summarising all the symbolism expressed by the three septenaries superposed ; next, the antagonism of colours expressed by the dove and the dragon ; the circle or ROTA, formed by the dragon or serpent to typify length of days ; finally, the kabbalistic divination of the entire Tarot, as practised in later days by the Egyptian Bohemians, whose secrets were divined and recovered imperfectly by Etteilla.
## 10: Blavatsky (1888) 1227 [1e-04]

>This symbolical sentence, in its many‐sided forms, is certainly most dangerous and iconoclastic in the face of all the dualistic later religions, or rather theologies, and especially so in the light of Christianity. Yet it is neither just nor correct to say that it is Christianity which has conceived and brought forth Satan. As an “Adversary,” the opposing Power required by the equilibrium and harmony of things in Nature, as Shadow is required to make still brighter the Eight, as Night to bring into greater relief the Day, and as Cold to make one appreciate the more the comfort of Heat, so has Satan ever existed. Homogeneity is one and indivisible. But if the homogeneous One and Absolute is no mere figure of speech, and if Heterogeneity, in its dualistic aspect, is its offspring, its bifurcous shadow or reflection, then even that divine Homogeneity must contain in itself the essence of both good and evil. If “God” is Absolute, Infinite, and the Universal Root of all and everything in Nature and its Universe, whence comes Evil or D’Evil if not from the same Golden Womb of the Absolute? Thus we are forced either to accept the emanation of good and evil, of Agathodæmon and Kakodæmon, as offshoots from the same trunk of the Tree of Being, or to resign ourselves to the absurdity of believing in two eternal Absolutes!
## 11: Blavatsky (1888) 1997 [1e-04]

>The Assyrians have not only preserved the memorials of seven‐and- twenty myriads of years [270,000 years], as Hipparchus says they have, but likewise of the whole apocatastases and periods of the Seven Rulers of the World.
## 12: Blavatsky (1888) 1220 [1e-04]

>The Assyrians have not only preserved the records of seven and twenty myriads of years, as Hipparchus says they have, but likewise of the whole apocatastases and periods of the Seven Rulers of the World.
## 13: Levi (1856) 509 [1e-04]

>with one hand, and with the other the pentagram. On a table in front of him, between an open book and a closed purse, are ten deniers or talismans, arranged in two lines of three each and a square of four; the feet of the table form two n, and those of the juggler two inverted 1. The obverse side of the medal contains the letters of the alphabet, arranged on a magical square, as follows :
## 14: Levi (1860) 516 [1e-04]

>Amidst a great multiplicity of commentaries and studies on the work of Dante, no one, that we are aware, has signalised its characteristic in chief. The masterpiece of the glorious Ghibelline is a declaration of war against the papacy by a daring revelation of mysteries. The epic of Dante is Johannite and Gnostic; it is a bold application of Kabalistic figures and numbers to Christian dogmas, and is further a secret negation of the absolute element therein; his visit to the supernatural worlds takes place like an initiation into the Mysteries of Eleusis and Thebes. He is guided and protected by Virgil amidst the circles of the new Tartarus, as if the tender and melancholy prophet of the destinies of the son of Pollio were, in the eyes of the Florentine poet, the illegitimate yet true father of the Christian epic. Thanks to the pagan genius of Virgil, Dante emerges from that gulf above the door of which he had read the sentence of despair; he escapes by standing on his head, which means by reversing dogma. So does he ascend to the light, using the demon himself, like a monstrous ladder; by the force of terror he emerges from terror, from the horrible by the power of horror. He seems to testify that hell is without egress for those only who cannot go back on themselves; he takes the devil against the grain, if I may use so familiar an expression, and attains emancipation by audacity. This is truly protestantism surpassed, and the poet of Rome’s enemies has already divined Faust ascending to heaven on the head of the defeated Mephistopheles. Observe also that the hell of Dante is but a negative purgatory, by which is meant that his purgatory seems to take form in his hell, as if in a mould; it is like the lid or stopper of the gulf, and it will be understood that the Florentine titan in scaling Paradise meant to kick purgatory into hell.
## 15: Blavatsky (1888) 1848 [2e-04]

>From Gods to men, from Worlds to atoms, from a Star to a rush‐light, from the Sun to the vital heat of the meanest organic being—the world of Form and Existence is an immense chain, the links of which are all connected. The Law of Analogy is the first key to the world‐problem, and these links have to be studied coördinately in their Occult relations to each other.
## 16: Levi (1860) 1 [2e-04]

>Magic has been confounded too long with the jugglery of mountebanks, the hallucinations of disordered minds and the crimes of certain unusual malefactors. There are otherwise many who would promptly explain Magic as the art of producing effects in the absence of causes; and on the strength of such a definition it will be said by ordinary people—with the good sense which characterises the ordinary, in the midst of much injustice—that Magic is an absurdity. But it can have no analogy in fact with the descriptions of those who know nothing of the subject; furthermore, it is not to be represented as this or that by any person whomsoever: it is that which it is, drawing from itself only, even as mathematics do, for it is the exact and absolute science of Nature and her laws.
## 17: Levi (1860) 74 [2e-04]

>The _Sepher Yetzirah_, the _Zohar_ and the _Apocalypse_ are the masterpieces of occultism; they contain more meanings than words; their method of expression is figurative, like poetry, and exact, like numerical formulæ. The _Apocalypse_ summarises, completes and surpasses all the science of Abraham and Solomon, as we will prove by explaining the Keys of the transcendent Kabalah.
## 18: Levi (1856) 147 [2e-04]

>At the end of the Eitual we shall provide further details, together with full documents, concerning the marvellous Tarot book, which is of all books the most primitive, the key of prophecies and dogmas, in a word, the inspiration of inspired works, a fact which has remained unperceived equally by the science of Court de Gebelin and by the extraordinary intuitions of Eteilla or Alliette.
## 19: Levi (1856) 338 [2e-04]

>Precious stones may also be employed for amulets and talismans ; but all objects of this nature, whether metals or gems, must be carefully kept in silken bags of a colour analogous to that of the spirit of the planet, perfumed with the perfumes of the corresponding day, and preserved from all impure glances and contacts. Thus, pantacles and talismans of the sun must not be seen or touched by deformed or misshapen persons, or by immoral women ; those of the moon are profaned by the looks and hands of debauched men and menstruating females ; those of Mercury lose their virtue if seen or touched by paid priests ; those of Mars must be concealed from cowards ; those of Venus from depraved men and men under a vow of celibacy ; those of Jupiter from the impious ; those of Saturn from virgins and children, not that their looks or touches can ever be impure, but because the talisman would bring them misfortune and thus lose all its virtue.
## 20: Levi (1860) 209 [2e-04]

>Humanity as a fact has never known more than one religion and one worship. This universal light has had its uncertain reflections and its shadows, but ever after the dark night of error we behold it emerge, one and pure like the sun.
# Magnetic Sleep

## 1: Denis (1838) 42 [0]

>Accordingly, I now proceed with the evidence. In 1820, numerous experiments were performed by me in Paris, at the Hotel-Dieu, and many incredulous physicians, attracted by the novelty, witnessed them, and wished to satisfy themselves that there was no deception. To this I assented, and accordingly they proceeded to prove the insensibility of the patients by a variety of tests, many of which were very cruel ; but these experiments were not performed by me ; it was a sort of sacrifice of humanity which incredulity insisted upon, and in the infancy of the science I had no alternative excepting to permit them, or allow truth itself to be compromised by the refusal. Hence the unconscious patients were subjected to the following trials : — their lips and nostrils were tickled with feathers ; their skin was pinched until ecchymoses (bruises) were produced ; smoke was introduced into the nasal passages, and the feet of one female were plunged into a strong infusion of mustard-seed at a high temperature. But not the slightest sign of pain did they evince. The expression of the countenance remained unchanged, nor was the pulse in any degree affected. On being awakened, however, out of the magnetic sleep, they all experienced the pain usually attendant on such applications, and were exceedingly angry at the treatment they had received. Many of the physicians who had witnessed this scene, and who were convinced of the reality of the magnetic influence, applied to me to teach them how to conduct the operation, and several very soon acquired the method, upon which they proceeded to convince themselves, by their own personal experiments, of the absolute extinction of sensibility in such cases. The means they adopted were on many occasions revolting, but the result removed every shade of doubt from their minds. I now, therefore, proceed to adduce their evidence. It is no longer I who attest the facts ; and praise or blame, should either be bestowed, will be alike inapplicable to me. Here, therefore, I subjoin the following proces-verbal by Dr. Kobouam, who was then attached to the Hotel-Dieu. " I, the undersigned, certify, that on the 6th of January, 1821, M. Recamier, on visiting the hospital, requested me to put into magnetic sleep a man named Starin, whose bed was No. 8 of the ward Sainte-Madelaine. M. Recamier first threatened him with the application of moxa,* if he allowed himself to fall asleep, and I caused the patient, much against his will, to pass into the magnetic sleep, during which M. Recamier applied the moxa on the fore-part of the right thigh, which moxa produced an eschar seventeen lines in length and eleven in breadth ; that Starin did not manifest the least sign of pain, either by crying out, gesture, or variation of the pulse ; that he did not feel the application of the moxa until I had roused him out of the magnetic sleep. Madame SainteMonique, the matron of the ward, MM. Gibert, La Peyre, Bergeret, Carquet, Truche, &c, &c, were present during this seance" Here, also, is another procesverbal by the same physician. " I, the undersigned, certify, that on the 8th of January, 1821, at the request of M. Recamier, I put into magnetic sleep the woman Leroy (Lise), lying in the bed No. 22 in the ward Sainte-Agnes. M. Recamier had previously threatened that he would apply a moxa to her person if she allowed herself to fall asleep. I, Robouam, then, much against her will, caused the patient to fall into magnetic sleep, during which M. Gibert burned agaric under her nostrils, and this nauseous smell produced no perceptible effect ; that afterwards M. Recamier himself applied moxa on the epigastric region (pit of the stomach), which produced an eschar of fifteen lines in length and nine in breadth ; that during the operation, the patient did not shew the least symptoms of suffering, either by cries, gestures, or variation of the pulse ; that she remained in a state of perfect insensibility, and that on awakening from the magnetic sleep, she shewed signs of suffering great pain. MM. Gibert, Crequi, &c, were present at this seance? (Signed,) Robouam, Docteur-Medecin.
## 2: Denis (1838) 36 [0]

>When an individual subjects himself to the magnetic operation, the change which is thereby produced in his habitual mode of being, is often very sudden and manifest ; but more frequently it is necessary for the magnetiser to persevere for awhile before any ostensible effect is induced. This will depend, it is obvious, on the power of the magnetiser and the susceptibility of the person magnetised ; but although in some cases no effect be externally manifested, it will in the sequel be found that no individual can magnetise another without producing some change in his organisation ; nay, sometimes the effect of the magnetic action is not felt until some time after the operation. The symptoms most commonly induced are the following : — slight pricking and winking of the eyelids — an increase, or perhaps diminution, in the pulsations of the heart — a sensible alteration in the temperature of the body — the cheeks sometimes are flushed, or become extremely pale — the expression of the countenance, indeed, undergoes a remarkable change — stretchings of the limbs and deep y awnings succeed — a gurgling noise (borborygmus) is often heard in the throat — the patient is, perhaps, disposed to move, yet feels unable to do so, or experiences an unusual sense of composure, which is to him a peculiar, an undefined delight — the breathing frequently becomes much affected, and by a singular anomaly, occasionally the circulation increases in rapidity, while the respiratory movements of the chest become less and less frequent. In one case, particularly, which fell under my observation, the pulse previous to the operation was sixtyfive, the inspirations twenty-four per minute ; after the operation, however, the pulse rose to one hundred and fifteen, and one hundred and twenty, while the inspirations fell to twelve. These are the primary and most simple effects of animal magnetism ; but often, under circumstances which it is previously impossible to determine, phenomena of a more remarkable character are developed. The eyelids of the magnetisee appear spasmodically affected, and close against his will ; in vain does he attempt to open them, or change his attitude, in order to keep himself awake ; for if the magnetiser persevere, he yields gradually to his influence, and sleep, more or less profound, supervenes. His head, by its own weight, inclines forward upon the chest, or more rarely, is thrown backwards ; his eye-lids are generally half open, and the eye-ball moves slowly in the socket ; its motions may be followed by the observer, who will perceive it gradually become fixed ; drops of mucus fall from the lips, the limbs become cold, and the respiration audible. If spoken to, the magnetic sleeper may perhaps attempt an answer, and appear manifestly unable to speak, or he will suddenly awake, rub, his eyes, stare round him with astonishment, and recollect what has passed, as we may recal a dream. To disturb any one in this state is highly improper, for convulsive fits may be thereby occasioned ; indeed, the curiosity of the idle, and their wanton interference with persons in a magnetic state, may, when they are least aware of it, lead to dangerous consequences.
## 3: Denis (1838) 240 [0]

>It would not be easy to give a better description of the mode of conducting the magnetic operation than this of M. Deleuze ; but from his very minute account of the manipulations, it might be supposed that the operation consisted principally in them. This would be a grievous error. It is important to remember that the magnetic power does not consist in mere gestures ; another medium is necessary, which the manipulations merely bring into play at the command of the will. This medium may be termed the vital principle, life spiritualised, universal, magnetic, or nervous fluid — it matters not. But most assuredly there is an emanation of a peculiar agent, for out of nothing nothing comes ; and manipulations alone, performed with the greatest care, could never produce the slightest magnetic results. The operation may be said to be almost purely intellectual — its success depending on the energy of the will ; and we must learn to exercise this faculty before we can educe its latent energies. Hence we observe some magnetisers readily obtain results by processes much less complicated. They merely move their hands in a certain direction, as taught by Dr. Rostan. They excite the course of the nerves by slightly touching the individual alternately on the head and epigastrium. I know many who never touch their patients ; they act at a distance of some inches, and have a particular rule of conduct to control the effects produced ; and in the cure of diseases this method appears to be more successful than that accompanied by complex manual movements. The error of magnetisers in general is, that they pursue the arbitrary dictates of their own fancy, instead of being guided by observation. They aver, with much self-confidence, that if we wish to produce a certain effect, we must magnetise in such or such a manner ; that if we would obtain another result, we must operate differently. If, taking their rules for our guidance, we wish to produce somnambulism, it is necessary to magnetise the patient's brain ; but, far from increasing the tendency to sleep, this very manoeuvre often prevents it altogether, by producing an over-excitement, which keeps the individual in a state of greater watchfulness than that which preceded the operation ;* whereas, had the same individual been magnetised without exciting the head more than any other part of his body, sleep might have been induced. Nay, it is even sometimes necessary to magnetise organs remote from the brain ; for they exercise a sympathetic influence on this organ, which brings on the crisis more speedily and certainly than if it were itself magnetised.
## 4: Denis (1838) 54 [0]

>On the 16th of April, 1829, the following interesting case was reported to the surgical section of the French Academy, by M. Jules Cloquet, the eminent surgeon in Paris, who himself performed the operation. The commissioners of the French Academy, finding, from personal investigation, that the case was fully authenticated, considered it their duty to embody it in their Report. " Madame Plantin, a lady sixty-four years of age, residing at No. 151, Rue St. -Denis, consulted M. Cloquet, on the 8th of April, 1829, for an ulcerated cancer in the right breast, which she had for several years been afflicted with, and which was complicated with a considerable enlargement of the corresponding axillary glands. M. Chapelain, her ordinary physician, who had been in the practice of magnetising her for some months, with the view, as he said, of dispersing the swelling of the breast, had not been able to obtain any other result than that of producing a very profound sleep ; during which, sensibility appeared to be annihilated, while her ideas still retained all their clearness. He proposed to M. Cloquet to operate upon her during this state, and as the latter considered the operation indispensable, he consented, and it was fixed for the following Sunday, the 12th of April. During the two days preceding that of the operation, the lady was magnetised several times by M. Chapelain, who, whilst she was in a state of somnambulism, prepared her to submit without fear to the operation, and even brought her to converse upon it with confidence, although, when awake, she rejected the idea with horror.
## 5: Denis (1838) 257 [1e-04]

>No symptom can indicate the moment when this crisis supervenes ; I have observed it a great many times. It has often occurred when I intended to bring on a cessation of the usual magnetic sleep, that the somnambulist suddenly, and against my will, collapsed into this singular condition, in which he remained for several hours together. It is the most extraordinary state known in animal magnetism ; it is, perhaps, the most dangerous, and also the best calculated to afford instruction, when we know how to question, in proper time, these extatic somnambules. If we could hit upon the ideas which are uppermost in their minds, it is probable that we might obtain the most useful revelations ; there is but one moment for this ; we must seize the instant of transition from the ecstatic to the usual somnambulic state, for they soon lose all recollection of the sensations they experienced. This state seems to be the limit of an entirely new order of being ; " it is an unfathomable mystery, in which the mind is wholly lost ;" and I consider it the most dangerous crisis that can occur, and the most likely to be attended by fatal consequences, should the magnetiser leave the patient to himself, after having plunged him into an ecstatic sleep.
## 6: Denis (1838) 268 [1e-04]

>It is this indirect mode of magnetisation which doubtless gives rise to anomalies in the effects produced, which would not appear were the same individual subjected to direct magnetisation. The subtlety and power of the magnetic fluid is almost inconceivable. As I have before stated, I believe that no one ever submits to the operation of magnetism without some change being induced in his organisation. He may not be sensible of it at the time ; he may rise from the seance apparently unaffected ; yet some hours afterwards may the magnetic effects develop themselves. This has often occurred to me. I have magnetised persons who were not conscious either during or immediately after the operation, of any results, yet have a short time afterwards become somnambulic. The subtle and penetrating intensity of the magnetic fluid, annihilating all relations of space and time, is, however, more distinctly manifested in the magnetisation of persons at a distance, or through intervening partitions — as through screens, folding doors, or thick walls. The success, however, of this experiment will depend, not only on the power of the magnetiser, but also on the peculiar susceptibility of the patient, which should always be taken into consideration. As a general principle, the stronger, speaking magnetically, magnetises the weaker, — women are more easily affected than men — persons who are sickly than persons in robust health.
## 7: Denis (1838) 276 [1e-04]

>But it is not only in nervous diseases that animal magnetism is so valuable a therapeutical agent ; in derangements of the vascular system, in the early stages of inflammation, and on the accession of fevers, it is equally useful. In cases of general debility, depending on scrofulous diathesis, to which young persons are so liable, it produces also a remarkably invigorating effect on the system. It ought, however, to be observed that the application of animal magnetism in the treatment of disease produces beneficial effects, albeit the more remarkable physical and psychical magnetic phenomena be not developed. The good, therefore, which is to be derived is not to be estimated by the ostensible magnetic effects which are induced.
## 8: Denis (1838) 100 [1e-04]

>The discovery of magnetic somnambulism, instead of advancing, rather retarded than otherwise the progress of the science, inasmuch as the facts above stated appeared so startling and incredible, that many held it superfluous even to entertain any consideration of them ; and dismissed them, at once, as idle fictions and knavish impositions. The concurrent testimony, however, of so many individuals, who had no interest whatever in the matter, and whose integrity and powers of judgment could not be impugned, induced many who were incredulous to examine the facts ; and hence observations on this phenomenon have, during the last fifty years, been accumulated in all parts of Europe, even by those very individuals who were originally the most determined and perverse sceptics. I now, therefore, proceed to describe the phenomena which magnetic somnambulists exhibit ; but it is proper to observe, that no criterion of comparison can be established between different cases, because men differ as much from one another in somnambulism as they do in their habitual waking state. The Count de Redern, a distinguished savant, who devoted much attention to animal magnetism, observes, —
## 9: Denis (1838) 267 [1e-04]

>The magnetic influence, when thus communicated, instead of inducing sleep, generally gives rise to spasms, convulsions, and alarming symptoms. On another occasion, I was magnetising a lady who was but little sensible of the magnetic influence^ when a person who stood beside her felt, during the operation, her limbs benumbed, and pricking pains in her eyelids. On the following day the same lady was again magnetised, without the intention of producing an effect on any one else ; but the same attendant again experienced symptoms more decided than on the preceding day, and remained the whole of that day afterwards in a state of excessive lassitude. Again, at the next seance she was affected so much that somnambulism was brought on, and yet I had no intention of producing this result. She soon awoke ; but, yielding to sleep again, she remained in this state for several hours. A similar incident occurred to me while operating at the house of a patient of mine, the wife of a counsellor of state. Her lady's-maid, who attended the sitting to render assistance if necessary, was seized, while I was magnetising her mistress, with severe spasms, which soon became very alarming. I rose to subdue them, but she hurried away, declaring that I gave her pain, and that she would not allow me to come near her. She, however, soon recovered, and I attributed the effects only to an excited imagination. When perfectly recomposed, she sat down again near to her mistress, upon whom I recommenced the magnetic operation as before. But in about five minutes, and without any intention on my part to exert any influence on this attendant, she was again seized with the same description of paroxysm, accompanied with considerable pain and difficulty of breathing, from which she did not recover for several days afterwards.
## 10: Denis (1838) 299 [1e-04]

>In accordance with the views above stated, we shall find that the animal magnetic fluid, or that invisible principle or agent which produces the magnetic phenomena, pervades all bodies, — in other words, all are conductors of this fluid. It may be incorporated or accumulated in them so that they may receive and retain it, and thereby exhibit magnetic phenomena, and the affinity between the animal-magnetic fluid and these bodies into which it enters is so great that no chemical or physical power can separate them. Chemical re-agents and caloric have no power over it. There is, however, very little analogy between the imponderable fluids known in chemistry, and the animal-magnetic fluid. In proof of all which I shall here refer to numerous experiments which are well authenticated. A magnetised vitreous body, which had put a somnambulist to sleep in a few seconds, was afterwards rinsed with water and wiped with a linen cloth ; on being again presented to the same magnetic subject he fell asleep in one minute and a half.
## 11: Denis (1838) 53 [1e-04]

>In the " Journal de Toulouse," April 5, 1830, the following case is reported : — " We have already witnessed the curious experiments performed at Toulouse, by the Comte de Brivazac ; the document which has now reached us, gives an account of a case which occurred in the department of the Gers, at the house of the justice of peace for the canton of Condom, in the presence of several persons, among whom were some of our own acquaintance. Jean Bordere, in the before-mentioned canton, was suffering from an abscess from congestion on the fore part of the thigh. His medical attendants declared that it was necessary to lance it freely, but that the operation should be conducted with much skill and prudence, because the crural artery ran through the tumour, which was very much enlarged. The Comte de Brivazac, whose power as a magnetiser is remarkable, proposed to throw the patient into a magnetic sleep, whereby insensibility might be superinduced, in order that the pain of the operation, inevitable in a waking state, might be spared the sufferer. His proposition was accepted. At the end of two minutes the patient was thrown into the magnetic state. His lucidity was not remarkable. He answered the magnetiser that it was in vain for him to try, as he could not perceive his complaint. At that moment, Dr. Larieu began, with great dexterity, the operation. He repeatedly plunged the probe into the opening made by the bistoury, in order to let out the purulent matter, the flow of which was occasionally impeded by albuminous flakes. A dressing was immediately afterwards ; applied. During the operation, the patient remained motionless as a statue ; his magnetic sleep was in nowise disturbed, and on the proposal being mooted that he should be brought out of the magnetic "state, M. de Brivazac spontaneously awakened him. M. Roc then drawing near, asked him whether he would submit to the operation, to which he replied, " I suppose I must, since it is necessary." M. Roc then informed him that it was unnecessary to recommence, as the operation had already been performed. The astonishment of the patient was at its height, when he saw the proofs of it ; for he had seen nothing, felt nothing, and remembered nothing, excepting the act of M. de Brivazac laying the palm of his hand upon his forehead to induce sleep."
## 12: Denis (1838) 174 [1e-04]

>" A part only of the intellectual faculties of the somnambule remain awake ; they are all so in the magnetic somnambule with regard to those with whom he is in contact en rapport. The natural somnambule is impelled by his own imagination, and certain corporeal impressions ; the magnetic somnambule wholly depends on the will and faculties of his magnetiser. The organisation of the magnetic somnambule, that of his magnetiser, and of those persons whom the latter brings in report with him by means of a slight contact, are all, as it were, identified as one and the same being ; so that the somnambule knows inwardly what takes place in the system of another person ; feels diseases which are not his own, and has an intuitive instinct of the remedies applicable to them. This it is which, to the unspeakable scandal and indignation of classic medicine, gave birth to her rival sister, under the name of magnetic medicine. The magnetic somnambule is conscious of the state and organisation of an absent person on merely touching a vestment which has been worn, or an object which has been touched, by the same person. He can either recal or forget, at the will of his magnetiser, what he has felt during the fit of somnambulism. His sensations and perceptions may, at the will of the magnetiser, be changed ; or, in other words, he will find sweet that which is bitter, and vice versa. He may also change his predilections and habitual dispositions.
## 13: Denis (1838) 262 [1e-04]

>As I have already observed, it is sometimes very difficult to awaken or bring patients out of the magnetic sleep ; speaking generally, it is more difficult to conduct the operation after sleep is induced than it is to produce sleep itself. In most treatises on animal magnetism, it is stated that magnetisers can at pleasure restore their patients to the ordinary, or waking state. This is an error. I have often, in a few minutes, brought on sleep, and could not for hours afterwards awaken the patient, notwithstanding that 1 have energetically applied all the processes usually prescribed in such cases. In vain have I exerted my abilities to the utmost ; the more I have wished and willed to induce the waking state, the more has the intensity of the sleep increased. I have passed my fingers over the eyelids until I have produced ecchymosis, yet all my efforts have proved unavailing ; and it is a curious fact, which deserves attention, that when such persons awake from this indomitable sleep they fall again into somnambulism, and then the slightest noise will awaken them. A case of this description was lately communicated to the Lancet by Dr. Sigmond, the Lecturer on Materia Medica and Therapeutics at the Windmill .street School of Medicine in this city. Unlike many of his professional brethren, this gentleman has not disdained to make animal magnetism the subject of conscientious investigation, and has performed himself, to confirm his conviction, several experiments.
## 14: Denis (1838) 475 [1e-04]

>On Tuesday last, April 10th, I was going round the wards of the infirmary ; she was then in a fit, and had been so for six hours. Having seen the accounts in the Lancet regarding Mesmerism, and Dr. Elliotson being an authority in its favour, although I had never seen it practised, and was rather sceptical regarding its existence, I determined the next day to try it upon this patient. Without the girl being informed, or having the least knowledge of what was going to be done, or for what purpose, the process was commenced by my pupil, Mr. Vidal, and I sat beside, watching the progress. In about ten minutes she complained of increased weight and pain in the head ; I joked with her, and told her it was all fancy. In about five minutes more I found her pulse lower in frequency ; she occasionally sighed, and there was a slight twitching of one hand ; on being asked a question she attempted but could not answer me, and in twenty minutes her head fell back, and she was in a profound trance. I tried many efforts to arouse her, such as tickling the face and neck with a piece of tape, which I also passed up her nose ; I lifted her arm up two feet from the chair and let it fall,- and she was shaken by the nurse, — all without the least effect ; she was carried to bed, where she was allowed to remain half an hour, when, after about half a dozen transverse passes over the eyebrows, she awoke. From that time to the present, (Tuesday, the 17th,) she has never had a fit, and she has been in every respect perfectly well. Whether they will return I cannot say, but certainly the effect has been most remarkable.
## 15: Denis (1838) 176 [1e-04]

>" It might be thought that the intellectual faculties of the somnambule, plunged in this state of complete lethargy, are as inert and void as his bodily powers : no such thing. There are thoughts, dreams, and somnambulism, in somnambulism. On recovering from his lethargy, and being replaced into his previous state of somnambulism, the crisiac relates all the delightful and marvellous thoughts and sensations lie has had during his apparent state of absolute insensibility. What to the spectator was a scene of death, to him was a new life, a hundredfold more intense and spiritual than his ordinary mode of existence. A reiteration of the same fit brings on a recurrence of the same visions. When restored to the state of simple somnambulism, its individual memory returns with it, to be only obliterated by a restoration to the perfect waking state," &c*
## 16: Denis (1838) 209 [1e-04]

>* It may be proper to apprise unprofessional readers of what is meant by the solar plexus. The nervous system of vertebrate animals is composed of the brain, the spinal cord, and nerves proceeding from, or, more properly speaking, in connexion with them. But besides these there is a system of nerves called the sympathetic, which supply the interior organs of the body. The interlacing, or great concatenation, of these in the neighbourhood of the stomach, or epigastrium, is the solar plexus here referred to. It should be added, that the functions of these nerves are not understood, and magnetisers have observed, that the effects of animal magnetism are more speedily marked in this than in any other region of the body.
## 17: Denis (1838) 312 [1e-04]

>Jamblichus so distinctly describes the state of magnetic somnambulism induced by the mystic ceremonies in these temples, that the passage might be appropriately transferred into any modern treatise on animal magnetism. " This state," says he, " commences by a certain heaviness or inclination of the head forwards, the eyes close involuntarily, and we find ourselves in a state between sleeping and waking. In ordinary sleep we do not distinctly and fully remark either what occurs or where we are; but when sleep comes from divinity, we in reality sleep not. We perceive perfectly objects, . and distinguish them more clearly than in our accustomed waking state ; so that it is in this kind of sleep that vaticination principally takes place."* " They who are thus inspired," he continues, " do not live as other men, even in their corporeal state, because many of them do not burn when fire is applied to their bodies ; the divinity that inspires them from within repels it, so that even if they are burned they are not sensible of it any more than of the punctures of iron pins, or other torments. You will see them walk in places which would be otherwise impracticable." He then proceeds to describe the different effects produced according to the different modes of inspiration. " Some of the inspired," he observes, " are tranquil, others are agitated and move the whole of the body, or only certain limbs ; some dance or sing, or do quite the contrary ; others again extend the body and rise themselves in the air ; the sound of their voices is sometimes equal and prolonged ; sometimes unequal and interrupted ; sometimes strong and sometimes weak."f These effects, arising from what in that age was presumed to be the inspiration of the gods, manifestly correspond with the effects produced byanimal magnetism as attested by the French commissioners in 1784.
## 18: Denis (1838) 211 [1e-04]

>In her subsequent paroxysms, she began to understand what was said to her, and to answer with a considerable degree of consistency," &c. " She also became capable of following her usual employments during the paroxysm ; at one time she laid out the table correctly for breakfast, and repeatedly dressed herself and the children of the family, her eyes remaining shut the whole time. The remarkable circumstance was now discovered, that, during the paroxysm, she had a distinct recollection of what took place in former paroxysms, though she had no remembrance of it during the intervals. At one time, she was taken to church while under the attack, and there behaved with propriety, evidently attending to the preacher ; and she was at one time so much affected as to shed tears. In the interval, she had no recollection of having been at church ; but, in the next paroxysm, she gave a most distinct account of the sermon, and mentioned particularly the part of it by which she had been so much affected." — "During the attack, her eye-lids were generally half shut ; her eyes sometimes resembled those of a person affected with amaurosis, — that is, with a dilated and insensible state of the pupil ; but sometimes they were quite natural." — " At one time, during the attack, she read distinctly a portion of a book which was presented to her : and she often sung, both sacred and common pieces, incomparably better, Dr. Dyce affirms, than she could do in the waking state."*
## 19: Denis (1838) 317 [1e-04]

>Being commanded, however, again to do the same thing, she came to Adrian to repeat it, and embraced his knees ; having accomplished which dream, she washed her eyes in the lustral water in the temple, and recovered her sight.* Spartian also states that when this emperor was ill with fever, there came to him a certain blind man from Pannonia, who touched him, which being done, he who was blind recovered his sight, and the fever left Adrian. f In the same reign with Marcus Antoninus, lived Apollonius of Thyana, whose biography, written by Philostratus, supplies us with a number of other curious facts. One of the most remarkable of these was the resuscitation of a girl who was being conducted to the grave, having fallen down apparently dead during the solemnisation of her marriage. The funeral procession being incidentally met by Apollonius, he ordered it to stop, and after touching the young woman, and muttering some secret words, she recovered, began to speak, and returned to her paternal home.J It appears that Apollonius possessed in a high degree the magnetic power, and was himself often in a state of lucidity ; read the thoughts of others, and perceived events passing at a distance. He was at Ephesus when the tyrant Domitian was assassinated. All at once his voice became feeble, he paused, his eyes were fixed on the ground, he advanced three or four steps forward, and exclaimed with unwonted energy, " Strike the tyrant ! Strike !" And this he did, not as a person might who saw the event passing in a mirror, but as one who was present and witnessed the assassination passing directly under his eyes, and endeavoured to assist in it.* The Ephesians present were exceedingly astonished ; whereupon he again exclaimed, " Have confidence, O Ephesians, for the tyrant is this day slain : but why do I say to-day ? it is rather at this moment." t A few days afterwards the news arrived at Ephesus of the death of Domitian, which happened at the time and in the manner which Apollonius had described.
## 20: Denis (1838) 408 [1e-04]

>In addition to these theories, which do not carry with them even a colouring of plausibility, many lay considerable stress on the effects which the monotonous manipulations of the magnetiser must have on the patient. It is true that monotonous actions and sounds, — a rocking cradle, a swing, an old lullaby, the murmurs of the sea, — anything which by constant repetition fatigues the attention, will induce sleep; but let it be observed, that the sleep which is so produced is a perfectly natural sleep, there is neither insensibility, somniloquism, clairvoyance, or any of the phenomena which characterise the magnetic state. No monotonous motions of the hands merely before any person will give rise to these effects ; they depend, as I have already explained, on the will of the magnetiser, and the monotonous movements of the hands may, in many cases, be altogether dispensed with ; they are not necessarily a part of the operation. Lastly ; a theory has been lately proposed by Dr. Sigmond, who, having operated successfully in many cases, is of opinion that the " art consists in obliging the individual again to inspire by the nostrils the carbon he has already expired, whilst the currents of air caused by the extended fingers produce some effect on the facial nerves."* It is true enough, as travellers amuse themselves by proving at the Grotto del Cane that the inspiration of carbonic oxide gas induces stupor ; but Dr. Sigmond will, I doubt not, be able himself to draw a diagnosis between the stupor arising from the inhalation of narcotic gases and the insensibility of the magnetic state ; besides, it may reasonably be doubted whether the passing the fingers up and down before the nostrils, or even wrapping the mouth round with a cotton comforter, which might occasion a person to inhale repeatedly the breath he had expired, would lead to the accumulation of a sufficient quantity of this gas in the lungs to produce even stupor : this again is an untenable hypothesis. Hence not one of these theories affords any satisfactory explication of the magnetical phenomena which are developed.
# Seance

## 1: Cahagnet (1855) 248 [0]

>106. I take advantage of a visit paid me by Emile Rey, of whose sittings we have read in the first volume of the " Secrets,'* to beg him to allow me to magnetize him, as I had a few questions to put to him. It was not without some trouble that I could prevail on him to consent to my wishes, his family having told him that such experiments would make him ill. This child is but twelve years of age, and would be an excellent clairvoyante if conducted with perseverance ; but he prefers playing to sleeping, which is natural enough at his age. A few days before I had submitted to him a few questions which his guide was unable to answer ; I had a mind to get a solution of them. Once asleep, I tell him to ask for his guide. " Here he is," said he. — *' Ask him if there are any books in heaven." " He tells me there are none." — " Ask him, once more, if we have already lived on a material globe before appearing on earth." " He answers, ' No.' " — " What is the festival called, at which, the last time you saw him,'he told you he had been crowned V* ** The feast of the angels." — " What kind of pleasure did they take that day V " They danced a great deal in a circle." — *' What is this day called ?" " St. Nicholas' day, it was Monday." — " But you saw your guide before Monday, and the feast had already taken place ; ask him again, very slowly." " He replies that it was St. Nicholas' feast." — '* Your guide, then, is very fond of dancing in a circle, that he took so much delight in it." " Ah ! yes." — '* And while he was dancing, what had become of his horse ; no doubt he had put it in a stable V " There are neither stables nor houses in heaven ; there is but a large garden, a beautiful one. He put his horse in this garden. Horses are not so vicious there as on earth, they destroy nothing," — " Are they all little boys together 1" "Yes; but there are also little girls." — " Do the boys play with them ?" " Yes ; each piays with his own." — ''How his own]" "Each little boy has a little girl, whom he terms his companion, and with whom he always plays." — " Has your guide also a companion ?" " Yes." — " Does she ride on horseback with him ?" " No, she is not adroit enough." — " Could he let you see her ]" " He is going to fetch her." Emile waits a moment, then exclaims : " Here she is; she is a black." — " A black, what do you mean ?" *' Yes, she is a negress." Fearing that it might be an evil spirit that had a mind to play us some trick of his own, I attempted to drive her away in the name of God, but Emile said: "They are really sent by God, and you can't drive them away." — " Then, tell me how this negress is dressed 1" " She is in a beautiful white robe ; she is rather taller than Ais." — " Where was she born ?" " At Neva." — " That is a cold country, I believe. Was it not rather at Java, or Nouga-Hiva 1" " No, she says Neva." — " Did Ais know her on earth 1" " Yes, at Paris, but he saw her only twice ; she lived opposite his house." — " Has she any relations with her in heaven ?" " No." — " And Ais V " He has an aunt." — " You once told me that he had his father there V " He replies that he never told me so ; 'tis I who made a mistake." — " The parents of this little negress, are they still in Paris ?" ** She says that she believes that they have returned to Neva." — " Is she black in heaven, as she appears to you on earth ?" " No, she is as fair as Ais." — " What is the color of her hair in heaven ?" '" Flaxen." — " And Ais]" *' He has fine black hair." — " Of what color are their eyes V *' Both of them have blue eyes." — "Do they never quit each other ?" " Ais says no ; but," observes Emile, " since he came to see me without her, he must surely quit her." — "Ask him again." " He replies that he leaves her only to come and see me, and to go and see his aunt in heaven." — " Has this little creature also seen God?" "Yes." — '* In what form 1" "I have already told you, in the human form." — "How is he named ?" " Our Lord Jesus Christ." — " Is it Jesus Christ who is the God, Creator of heaven and earth ?" " No." — " Who then ?" " It is God."— "Who is Jesus Christ?" "The Son of God."— • " But you say that in heaven he is called God." " He is called God, but he is not God ; he is the Son of God." — " What you tell me, is that really the answer made you ?" " Yes." — " Does your guide eat in heaven 1" "Yes." — "What?" "Fine fruits." — "What fruits are they?" " Such as on earth." — "Does he undergo any sufferings ; experience any fatigue?" "He does not suffer, and is never fatigued." — "Does he sleep sometimes?" "Yes." — " On what does he lie down ?" "On a beautiful turf in the garden." — " Ask his companion if she dearly loves him, and whether she makes much of him ?" " She says that she does, indeed." I awake Emile.
## 2: Cahagnet (1855) 271 [0]

>114. Adele was suffering from a nervous pain throughout the entire left part of her head. At first we thought it a fluxion. then an epidemic malady attacking all nervous constitutions. This pain varied in its crises ; we thought it over at night, on the morrow it returned. Adele could not visit herself (magnetically) in her accesses, which were not unlike fits of madness ; her face became of a dark purple color, the lower jaw trembled convulsively, a tremor that gained the whole body; anger was the result, she struck her head with her fists violently. Scarcely could I prevent her from becoming a victim to her passion. In the intervals of these crises she no longer felt anything, and was unwilling to visit herself, for fear as she said that the pain would return. As I have before said, Adele is very obstinate, and independent of my influence in her sleep as in her watchful state. I could not by any means induce her to procure for herself relief ; we employed fumigations, cataplasms, cleared the lower passages, and I magnetized her perseveringly, but all was of no avail. Nearly three weeks had passed away, and we still had the misfortune to see her suffering without being able to afford her any relief, when I had recourse to another somnambulist, who prescribed a few remedies, which, however, were attended with no favorable result. I was ill myself, consequently not in a fit state to magnetize her. If I attacked the part affected by passes, I only made her suffer more. At first I took this additional suffering for favorable crises, and as the precursors of a cuie; but it was no such thing. An idea came into my head to magnetize her at a great distance, by the look only, fixing the extremities of her feet for a longer or shorter period of time. This kind of magnetization procured but momentary relief. We were in hopes that, cleared of the redundancy of blood, she would be cured ; such, however, was not the case. M. Blesson, a friend of mine, and a magnetizer, one of the besthearted men on earth, perceiving my inability to perform a cure, proposed trying himself. I accepted his offer with joy and confidence, thinking that it was a beneficent spirit which, having pity on us, animated M. Blesson, and would remove all our inquietude. Under any other circumstance I should never have allowed any one, however well-intentioned, to operate on Adele, but at this moment it would have been egotism ; she suffered too much, and my impotence commanded me to attempt all. This gentleman did all that it is humanly possible to do under like circumstances, and obtained no better result than myself. On the 19th of February she took it into her head to snuff up po.wdered camphor in great quantities ; this so irritated her that she found fault with my purchasing a pair of under-stockings, which I had procured her for that very morning, in the idea that they would keep up a gentle heat in her feet and disengage her head from the blood or fluid which might thus cause her suffering. At any other time Adele would have thanked me fur such attention, being as she was, of a just, upright, and grateful disposition. It was otherwise : she tried to pick a quarrel with mo. I did my best to persuade her by calm and logical reasonings, but this brought on in her an alarming fit of madness. Her face became injected with a dark blood; she took up a table and dashed it aside, opened the window, and was about precipitating herself from a fifth story, when, as quick as she, and endued with a strength I never before knew, I seized her round the waist, pressed her against me with violence, and breathed coldly on her forehead, with such conviction, such power, that her teeth clacked, her whole body bent backward, and she uttered shrieks of pain, as if I were breaking her bones. (Adele is a very stout, strong woman.) She begged me to cease this powerful breathing, which I can not too highly recommend to magnetizers, as having succeeded with me in many circumstances wherein all medical and human means appeared impotent. Could man produce, by other emanations of the body, what he is capable of producing, through breath, he would fancy himself a God. His error would be a very pardonable one ; for it is necessary to have done what I have many a time done to appreciate so magical a power. When her head appeared to me cool, and her mind calm, we advised her to go to bed, which she did without any resistance. The blood flew up to her head, and an hour's delirium was the consequence. I magnetized ker to bring back the blood to the extremities. Exhausted as I was, obtaining no result, I threw myself on a seat, my heart broken with grief and fear, the tears in my eyes.
## 3: Cahagnet (1855) 83 [0]

>61. A few days after this sitting the abbe submits to me a few doubts he has conceived as to the moral condition of Father Lauriot. To clear up his doubts in this respect he proposes putting a few questions to him in Latin, thus enabling them both to converse in secret on hermetic operations, as neither I nor my clairvoyante was acquainted with Latin. He put his question, which Adele did her best to rej^roduce to M, Lauriot ; she rendered his answers in French, saying : " Just so, just so." The abbe observed to me that these answers were quite irrelevant to his questions, the purport of which, he tells me (and I believe without disguise), was : *' Do you know the lady now present V* The question, under such circumstances, was as absurd as the answer, since he was aware that a spirit can not perceive matter. Adele observes to M. Lauriot that he answers at random the questions she puts to him in Latin. Then he begins talking Latin to her with a volubility precluding the possibility of her transmitting his long discourse to the abbe. Fatigued with this sort of experiment, she finally refuses to continue, and I take it upon myself to question her in order to re-establish the conversation on a surer footing. " In the state you now are, do you still recollect the Latin tongue V *' Yes, as you may know from my having just answered in that tongue." — " The answers are not such as we desired," " The abbe knows that we took a three days' trip together to Versallleis, and that it was tlicn I made lilm acquainted witli the matter." — " Monsieur says that he certainly did take a trip with you, not to Versailles, however, but to Saint Cloud — not of three days, but one only ; that you spoke to him on the matter, but did not make him acquainted with it. You, perceive, therefore, that you commit errors which ought not to be. We always see you on your knees ; you do nothing but pray, then ?" " I pray to God for men in general, and for my relations." — '* You have, then, relations on earth V *' Yes." — "Have you any brothers 1" *' No."— " Sisters ?" "Yes." — " Is your mother dead ?" " No." — ** The abbe says the contrary ; your mother died before you. It is quite true that your father is dead, that you have no brother, and only one sister; but, as to your mother, you are mistaken." After this fresh mistake we conclude that the man is not altogether in his right senses ; the abbe observing to me that his mother died while he was in a state of insanity, and this accounts for his having no knowledge of her death. We request the presence of Adele's brother to whom we put the following question : " This man, no doubt, is deranged ?" " He is a very honest man, thoroughly good, and remarkably well-informed, but has at times rambling ideas ; he is constantly running about, resting nowhere long at a time ; he is seen by us everywhere.'* — " This man had on earth hallucinations, which he has, doubtless preserved V " He has preserved, as I have told you, his strongest predilections, and his mind seems in consequence disordered." — " Those who die deranged are not, then, restored to a sane condition ?" "No, their infirmity constitutes their chief happiness; they meet together, think alike, and are happy." — " But comes there a time when these men recover their reason V " Yes, God purifies them gradually, and they enter a more enlifj-htened circle." — " We can not trust to this man, who would make us participate in his errors in operations where none should exist." *' I will send you another, who has had some experience in the same kind of operations ; after putting his clairvoyance to the test, you will attend to his counsels, if you think fit ; as for me, I have already told you, I do not devote myself to such pursuits."
## 4: Cahagnet (1855) 140 [0]

>92, Madame Gouget says that she receives salutary advice from her angel. "Who is your angel?" "Saint Paul." — *' There are two Saints Paul, is it the apostle or the hermit V ** The hermit." — " How does he appear to you ]" " He is a venerable old man, with a gray beard and a majestic air." — "Ask to see your real angell" "Here he is." — "Is it still the samel" "Yes." — "Ask for another]" "I see a group of them on my right," — " Beg one of them to approach and tell you his name V " Here is one," — " Describe him to me." " He is old, very old." — "What do you call old 1 is his face wrinkled V " No, but he quitted the earth ages ago." — "Angels have lived, then, on earth?" "Yes." — "Proceed with your description of him," " His hair is red and he has a very fine countenance." — " What is his dress V " He wears a sort of dress like a priest's chasuble, but it is not one however. I can not describe to you its form — it is not unlike a mantle. He has on a colored gauze scaif which passes over one shoulder and is tied on the opposite side under the arm; his legs are bare and he has a kind of slippers fastened to colored buskins." — " Desire him to go away if he is not an envoy of God." "Oh! he stays; he is an angel of light, and no power can drive him away from me." — " What is his name V " He has no name." — *' Let him take one." " He tells me to call him the anael of Paradise." — " Since he has been dead so lonor he ouffht to be well acquainted with heaven; can he give you a description of it '?" " Yes, he is gomg to show it me." — After her ecstasy, I ask her : ** What does he do in heaven 1" " He is happy." — " Are there gardens, houses, temples in heaven V " There are no gardens or houses, but there is a temple where all the angels are assembled." — " A temple is a house." " Yes; there is also one higher, much, very much higher, but into which all enter not that would." — " Where is this temple placed V " In the third heaven." — " There are several heavens, then V *' Yes ; there are three." — ** Where are these heavens ?" " Very high, very high." — " Is there a hell wherein we are burned ?" " No ; there is only a purgatory wherein we suffer much at being deprived of the sight of God, momentarily, and this is very painful." — " Are we burned there V " No ; there is no other suffering but what I have just told you." — "Do we remain there eternally T' "No; God is so good that he withdraws us from it." — " In what form is God seen in heaven?" "In the form of a brilliant sun, impossible to describe ; its rays are like the purest gold, and so dazzling that we can not look on ihem ; they give out such beautiful colors as we have no conception of upon earth. God is a spirit whom we can see only under this brilliant form." — " Are these things told you or have you seen them V " My angel tells me, and I have seen them in heaven whither he just now led me. Good God, how beautiful it was! My angel says that here is enough for lo-day."
## 5: Cahagnet (1855) 137 [0]

>I solemnly protest that I had never read this work of the great ecstatico-prophet, and I should think, indeed, that my little clairvoyante had not read it at his tender age any more than I. Let us compare what the venerable Swede said a century ago with what we have just read of this child entering into life. Had I not since had a knowledge of these celestial secrets I am conscious that I should not know how to reconcile to myself what was presented to me as strange by this young guide of eleven years of age; I have, therefore, done right to preserve this little journal, which, from what we have just read, proves that Swedenborg saw right, and the latter proves that my clairvoyante was in a good state. We shall no longer be astonished at seeing this guide on a winged courser, especially if we continue the perusal of all that Swedenborg says on the subject. Children, like grown-up persons, enjoy the possession of the objects of their affection, and their spiritual knowledge is very confined, as we have seen by the answers of Emile's guide. How, in presence of such revelations, can we remain shut up in an egotistical materialism ; especially when we have it in our power to procure similar ones to those I obtained, surrounded with so much prudence and mistrust 1 Every one can obtain them by his practice, which will leave him nothing to wish for, and largely indemnify him for his pains. Set to work, you that shall have read me ; say not that I was a visionary ; neither say that I was a mirror in which my clairvoyantes looked. You will perceive, by yourself, that such logic is totally false, at least you can not accuse me of a want of sincerity and impartiality : my questions are just as I put them ; the answers such as were transmitted to me ; all that I have been able to collect I give to the, reader, keeping nothing back; I wish not to establish a system but a truth, which consists in the existence of the soul and its identity after its separation from the body. Emile's little guide recognises a hell ; we can comprehend this belief; he has never seen it, and I should have deemed myself false to truth had I passed over in silence this revelation, which ought to take its place in this work as contrary revelations have taken theirs. The same guide also says that we can not see God, who is a soul, &:c., but that he is represented in heaven by a picture whereon is seen a man bound to a cross. Consult the secret 2299 of the aforesaid work of Swedenborg, as to children that have died in Christianity, aiid the coincidence of these two revelations will be clearly seen. I should never conclude did I wish to fix the reflections of the reader on all that has been unveiled to me; the right-minded will know full well how to draw from it consoling consequences.
## 6: Cahagnet (1855) 415 [0]

>" Monsieur : From the appeal you make in your first volume of the ' Secrets of the Life to Come Revealed,' to persons who may have any facts to communicate to you for insertion in the second volume you intend publishing, I beg to respond to this invitation in the interest, be it understood, of the occult sciences ; and, in order to prove to you that I have been in nowise astonished at the contents of your book, which I have read with great pleasure. Formerly a theatrical artiste, I devoted myself passionately to the study of cabalism, as offering, by its studious meditations, a counterpoise to the lighter studies of the theatre. I made acquaintance with a society (of madmen, the world. says ; of savans^ I reply), into which I was admitted, not without some difficulty. To tell you all that took place in this society, all the time I was a member of it, would be to undertake a work in three volumes. I will cite one fact, out of a thousand similar ones, which corresponds with what your somnambulist Binet says relative to the strength and power of spirits. The chief of our circle possessed a small, strong box, about a foot long, ten inches wide, and six in depth, in which he secured very valuable articles. One day it was stolen from him ; he was in great distress, when he sent to sleep a young man whom we ordinarily employed at our sittings. He questionod him as to the disappearance of the box, and begged him to find it. He went further, he ordered the spirit, who habitually came at our call, to bring back to him the box. The somnambulist was lying on the bed, which was at the farther end of the apartment, in a complete state of catalepsy ; I was in the middle of the room with this gentleman, and two other gentlemen, of the name of Revole, father and son. The clairvoyante issued a command, told us to open the window, which I did instantly, and M. Picolet beheld arriving the precious box, which he received in his hands at the moment I was going to take it myself. We saw nothing else ; and were no more surprised at this conveyance than we were at all that took place daily before our eyes. Yes, monsieur, a spirit can convey objects. Write this in my name — say, moreover, that I am seventy-eight years old, and that I should not wish, at such an age, to be a madman, or to impose on my fellow- men.
## 7: Cahagnet (1855) 94 [1e-04]

>70. M. Mallet is more or less time before appearing. He invariably gives Adele his blessing at his coming: and o-oino-: it seems, from what the abbe tells us, that such was a practice with him on earth. I shall pass over the abbe's questions, which have no reference whatever to what I desire to know about the spiritual world. — " What do you think of possessions, particularly the Loudun ones?" "They are merely the malicious tricks of evil spirits, because the good spirits do naught but good." — "What do you think of the convulsionnaires of Saint-Medard, &c. V " Among them are found both good and very wicked actions; things incredible appertaining to good and to evil spirits, deeds ordained by God, others which are condemned by him. We even appreciate all those things only by a judgment enlightened by the Divine light, and disengaged from all haughty and egotistical calculation. I can answer all you ask me only by counselling you to be circumspect, and to pray to God to enlighten your intelligence." — " Do you think that we can render ourselves invi.sible to several persons at once 1" " Yes, by drugs and pacts with evil spirits; but there is naught so displeasing to God as those things by which we may do all possible harm." — " Could you tell me this secret, I believe myself incapable of abusing it ?" " You are incapable of it, at this moment, because you do not possess it ; but no sooner should you know it than the pride of having such power at your command would take possession of you and lead you to do evil, as the rest. God suffers not the good spirits to divulge those things." — ** Fascination plays the principal part in it, does it not ?" " Did you send for me merely to read you a course of magic 1" — " No ; but in order to know what to think of those mysteries ; so many things have been written on this subject that T should wish to be enabled to form an opinion respecting them." *' Do not trouble yourself about them. There are many good things written ; but there are also many falsehoods, and wicked doctrines. Say no more about them."
## 8: Cahagnet (1855) 44 [1e-04]

>30. "There's my father," said she; "I know not why he dares not approach me." — " Ask him why ?" " He answers me that he desired to see me before his death, and that I did not come to receive his last farewell. He seems angry with me." — After this reproach he moves away; then appears before her a little girl she had had, and lost at the age of eighteen months, while out at nurse ; the child seemed to her bigger than when she parted with it, being then only six days old. — " How does this child appear to you ?" " Very well ; only she has a somewhat suffering air ; she is naked, has little wings, and a pink cap on her head." — " What ! naked, and a cap on her head f " Yes, 'tis just so that I see her." — " Ask her where she is V " In heaven." — " With whom V " Her grandmother." — "What does she do there 1" ."She plays with little girls whom she delights to teaze." — " She appears to you suffering, ask her whether she suffers 1" " She longs for me ; but, that apart, suffers not ; she says she is very happy; she has often seen God, and goes to him." — " How does the Deity appear to her?" "Like a man amidst a cloud of dazzling whiteness. She tells me that I shall live a long time yet in pain." — " Why is not your grandmother with this child, since she is under her care ; you should see her at least 1" " She tells me that at this moment she is praying to God for me ; my little girl has blue eyes ; I don't know what color they were. Here is a little boy whom I don't know, but he calls himself my nephew ; he died when nine years old, of convulsions, brought on by fits of passion, which have not yet left him, although dead. He says that he has at times seen God ; he entertains the hope of being with him by-and-by, when he improves in disposition." He announces to Francoise that his mother is suffering from a disease in the chest that will byand-by become a catarrh. Fran^oise sees many persons who claim relationship with her, although she does not know them; she does not even remember ever having seen them ; she desires to see her daughter when awake, and points out the means of effecting this, which succeeds perfectly well ; she no longer recollects anything. This greatly astonishes her, and especially tlie cap which she sees when awake on her child's head.
## 9: Cahagnet (1855) 68 [1e-04]

>49. Second apparition of Adele's little godson. She seems to take the greatest interest in this little being ; and when she beheld him depart it seemed to her that he was going to fall. She followed him, and entered into the comj^lement of ecstasy, from which it was no easy matter for me to withdraw her. She signified her displeasure at my attempts, saying to me as before, " Why force me to return to this world of trouble and misery ? I was so happy in accompanying this little being, who has, indeed, pretty little white wings, such as M. Bruno described. It is I who was wrong on this point." — " How far did you go V " I ascended to a great height, then passed through an immense vault, at the end of which were beautiful gardens, containing all that is remarkable for freshness and elegance. A great many persons were walking in the alleys, some reading, others playing music — all seemed very happy. The harmony among them appeared so perfect, that one could only desire to be with them. I saw my father there, my mother, the whole of my family. I wanted to stay, but my mother and your will obliged me to descend again." — " How were all those people dressed V " In a sort of gauze robe, of all colors. Their physiognomy was totally different ; but I fuhy recognised my relations, although if they appeared to us thus attired it would be more difficult to recognise them. God has done right in contriving otherwise."—-" How can males be distinguished from females'?" "By their form; for their light dress is no mark of distinction. If the passions were the same in heaven as on earth, we should be ashamed to see ourselves thus. No attention is paid there to such things." — " Bruno has already told me the same thing; this attire, however, is very indecent." " Yes, for us here below, where love exists, with its impure empire ; but there, no such thoughts are entertained."
## 10: Cahagnet (1855) 295 [1e-04]

>" If I let you speak with this pei'son and he answers your questions, will you believe ]" " Yes." — " Ask what you please V "Was Jesus Christ G-od, as to his human part as in his spiritual part V " He was God in his divine part, and not God in his human part." — " In heaven is he looked upon and recognised as God 1" '* Yes," — "Was he conceived by the Holy Ghost ?" *' Yes." — This gentleman declares himself satisfied with these three answers ; but A dele seems not to be in the least so, she says to me: *'I can but reproduce the truth ; these things were answered me, T was bound to tell you them ; as they accord not with what M. Mallet once told me, aid me in asking for him that I may see what he will oppose to the minister who has just made me these answers." This observation of Adele sharpens our curiosity ; we are eager to obtain an answer. M. Mallet comes and throws light on the question by these words : " Monsieur is a protestant minister and belongs to a society of similar persuasions. It is the same with all spiritual societies, they continue holding the same beliefs as they had on earth." "But you, a catholic minister, what do you think of these things, your religion admits them likewise 1" " I am not of the same opinion in this respect." I observe to Adele that in such case it is very difficult for us to obtain the truth, and advise her to search for it by herself. She was very much fatigued, and unable to give us the solution.
## 11: Cahagnet (1855) 344 [1e-04]

>This lady observes that she believes she can call to mind the old man, from the details she has heard, but she is not sure of it; it was the second. one she asked for, who must have been the old man's grandson. She also observes that this man was ten years older than Adele supposes him to have been, and that his complexion was not what is termed in England a clear complexion. For what concerns the elevated thoughts, she thinks the phrase might be rendered better thus : " He had good common sense, and elevated sentiments." All the other details are very exact. She refused to sign, for fear of compromising her name in the learned world ; but I have the names of two persons accompanying her, who if necessary would affirm the truth of this perception, and the exactitude of the details acknowledged by the lady, to whom I observed that, if I had forgotten to acquaint her with this condition, indivspensable to my sittings, I trusted she would have the goodness to inform those persons of it she was to send to me ; for I make it a great point, in the interest of truth and science, to support my citations with the testimony of those who acknowledge their exactitude. It remains for me to observe what distinction may be drawn between what we call a clear complexion, and what the English, who have a superior color to us, call a clear complexion. We appear to them very dark, and a dark Englishman with them would appear to us of a fine carnation: this makes me think that the difference in the eyes of Adele and this lady was but a matter of taste. Her second observation, as to the meaning of elevated thoughts, is sufficient to prove to us that we can attach no importance to the first one, because this man was not of illustrious birth, nor had he received a liberal education. He could have had but good common sense and elevated sentiments, although this lady assured us that he was habitually consulted by all the inhabitants of the town in which he resided in innumerable matters connected with art, mechanics, taste, and justice. Adele having made the observation to her that he was not in her sphere, she replied : " No ; he had no wit — received no education." I know not whether wit be included in education, or whether the latter does but give it the form; and whellier elevated thoughts are aught else than elevated sentiments. I leave this question to be decided by those who have wit and education.
## 12: Cahagnet (1855) 27 [1e-04]

>20. After a moment's concentration, Bruno perceives coming toward him an angel, in celestial costume — transparent robe, wavy hair, feminine physiognomy, legs bare, feet in buskined sandals ; this angel carries oif Bruno, who tells me he is leaving his body and going away ; at the lapse of an instant, he says : " I have traversed clouds ; my angel conducted me to my father, and left me alone with him." — " "What was your father doing?" "He is still reading." — "Is he happy]" ♦* Yes." — '* Does he eat, drink, and sleep ?" " He eats, drinks, and sleeps, only when disposed to do so for pleasure's sake, and not through necessity ; if he has a mind for a pear or any other fruit, he gathers it and eats it ; but I repeat, it is not through necessity, for spirits have no wants of this kind in heaven." — " What are their usages and occupations ?" " The same as on eai-th, what best pleases them." — " What are their acquirements V " Such as they are pleased to have, they study and learn by themselves what they desire to know." — " Can your father be deceived?" "No." — "Can he answer me a few questions V " Yes." — " Was it a good spirit that came at the last sitting ?" " No, I suspected him ; but they are all so very malicious, and wrap themselves up in so much precaution that one has some difficulty in recognising them." — " What now tells you that it is really your father who speaks to you 1 Can an evil spirit assume his form ?" " Yes : but my father will make himself known by placing his hand on his breast, a sign that an evil spirit can not take, because God permits only the good to make use of these kinds of signs : — an angel, for instance, will be recognised by a star, a crescent, a diamond, or precious stone. Were it not for this we should never distinguish between a good and an evil spirit."
## 13: Cahagnet (1855) 304 [1e-04]

>I still thank you for your kindness in conceding us such an album of images ineffaceable and full of life. In our first volume, we ventured to propound that we must have within us a sort of living panorama of all that we could have seen or known in the course of our existence. We confined ourselves to this, and did not think that you would be so well prepared to admit a proposition which appears at first sight so incredible ; you who refuse to admit the soul — a thing, however, very admissible. No doubt it is because I expatiated less on the first proposition than on the second one, that you return to it now. Well ! I am more generous than you : I grant you that a clairvoyante may see this impression of living images, or at least appearing such; but I will ask you, in my turn, how it is possible to have in one's self the impression of images of things or objects, one has never seen and heard of? You will say that it is by a sympathetic thread that, from body to body, the clairvoyante communicates to the object. In the sitting about to follow, you will perceive that you are wrong ; for the person appearing died in 1578. No being on earth could have known him, consequently the sympathetic thread is destroyed. Since you do not admit it, you concentrate it merely iu this material existence. How will you account for such a person being seen ? That is beyond your proposition. There are more than ten persons forming the chain of 1848 back to 1578; you may, if you please, assure yourselves of the description, whether as regards the person or dress. As for me, I have no need of these proofs. Had you read those which I present in this second volume, you would not thus venture to compromise your reputation as savans. You must be aware, however, that I could not have known M. Swedenborg, Father Lauriot, and many others mentioned in this work, who came unasked for, and declared themselves either friends or relatives of the persons appealing, and wholly unknown to those who asked for the apparition. You perceive it; 'tis an infinite maze, that requires to be studied, and I can assure you that I will tell you much more about it in the aforementioned work. In this I content myself with establishing facts which shall serve me as materials for the other. Oh ! then you will see that we shall be able to understand one another, especially by leaving to Cesar the things that are Cesar's. Now, only, as a guide to you, remember that the clairvoyante can spiritually see men, places, and actions, passed ages ago, that are in no human living memory ; that he can also see places and actions that will happen but in the course of ages, and this is still less in the memory of any one !
## 14: Cahagnet (1855) 259 [1e-04]

>M. A finds not a syllable to retrench from these details ; he puts his hands up to his face, and exclaims : " 'Tis enough to upset all reason — all received ideas ; I am convinced — thanks, thrice thanks. The details of the dress were sufficient for me ; there is nothing like it in France ; you can have no notion of it." Astonishment, admiration, were the accompaniments of this sitting. It remains for me, however, to explain why this man could not answer. When 1 said that the language of spirits was unique, universal, the language of sensations, still there are exceptions ; the fact being that the clairvoyante must be in a very elevated state to communicate by sensation, and interpret the meaning of it in material language. Adele gave us a proof of her good-will, by answering us questions which she herself must have interpreted to the deceased by the aforesaid language ; but as this requires much study on the part of clairvoyantes, in order to steer clear of errors, they generally dislike this kind of communication. If clairvoyantes answer not suitably the questions put — the effect of a bad interpretation — it appears ridiculous, as we have seen in the case of Father Lauriot ; they feel that they can not thus compromise the truth of these perceptions by needless questions in the very presence of the apparition. This proves that there is no communication of thoughts, as they would answer all. I am not always able to know what I desire ; and what T do not desire is often explained to me with details that leave less room for doubt than the solutions I demand. Therein, then, is a mission which God alone knows.
## 15: Cahagnet (1855) 403 [1e-04]

>*' I caused to appear a spirit that has enjoyed for some time the presence of God. I suppose him in a fit state to answer your questions, the result of which I communicate to you. I caused this spirit to be asked — " * 1. On leaving its material body, whither goes the soul ? " ' In the first place, the soul goes straight up to its Creator, to be judged according to its works; then finds itself placed in a state correspondent with its actions. In this state we find ourselves in heaven.' *' ' 2. What does it do in those places ? " * It ends with enjoying celestial happiness, perfect joy. It can no longer desire anything better.' *' ' 3. What is there in those places ? *' ' Whatsoever we desire to see there.' *' ' 4. How long a time does it remain in those places ? " ' It remains there for ever.' " * 5. But, however, if it again inhabits material bodies, how can that be ? " * Since it remains in heaven for ever, it does not inhabit again other material bodies. Grod has said, " Whosoever dwells in the heavens with me, dwells in them for ever !" ' ** * 6. Does every one finally dwell in heaven, or only a few ? " ' Every one finally dwells there : only there are some who are a very long time before being in this state.' " * 7. How does the soul know that it is asked for on earth `? ** * That depends in the first place on God, who permits men to be convinced, by these apparitions, of the immortality of the soul.' ** * 8. How does it manage to appear thus in all the details of its material body, and in the dress it wore on earth ? '•' * It is an image imprinted on it.' *' ' 9. At times there is something wanted in its features, or the ensemble of its costume : what is the cause of this ? " * That can not and ought not to exist, but there may be causes which I am unable to apprehend.'
## 16: Cahagnet (1855) 67 [1e-04]

>48. Adele exclaims : " Oh, here is a pretty little angel ! How fair, and how beautiful !"—'* Who is it 1" "My little godson, who died in my arms when only a fortnight old." " That's three years ago." 1 had magnetized Bruno the same day with Adele, he also sees this little angel. He declares that it has wings ; Adele says the contrary. After a moment's contemplation, she appears to be afraid. '* What makes you afraid ?" " My brother-in-law, who is come to see me, and wants to take me by the hand. I could very well dispense with his visit. I told my parents that I had no wish to see him. Why does he come ? I won't have him touch me ; let him go. Adele turns away in a pet from this man, who appears to her on her left ; while, on the contrary, all good spirits ordinarily appear on the right. I observed to her that it is very wrong and unjust on her part; that she ought not, in the state she is, to entertain ill-will toward any one. I desire her to give her hand to her brother-in-law. She obstinately refuses, saying that he is in a position well adapted for his malicious purposes ; that he had made her sister miserable; that he still did all he could to inspire her with disagreeable thoughts, but that when he had passed over to the good side she would forgive him. I am obliged to order off this man. One can not take this apparition for an effect of the imagination, as she in nowise desired it, and was horribly surprised and vexed at it. Never before had I seen her so harsh and wilful as toward this man.
## 17: Cahagnet (1855) 131 [1e-04]

>89. " Here is m,y angel." — " What is his name ?" " He calls himself Angel." — " He has no name then 1" " He has no need of one." — " T should wish him to take one when he comes to see you." " He tells me to call him Ais." — " Do you still see him on horseback 1" " Yes." — " On what does his horse stand V " On nothing ; he has wings also, and he flies." *' What do you perceive around him ?" " Nothing." — " Could Ais conduct you to heaven to see that fine garden V " He tells me that I shall go after my death." — "Why not immediately ? — in the state you are, you might go." "He won't let me ; he says that my body could not go, only my soul." — " Well ! let him conduct it." " He can not, because he fears the wicked angel." — " You have then a good and a bad angel ?" " The latter is not an angel, for we have but one we call angel, the other is a wicked spirit." — " Ais told you that he had dwelt on earth ; where did he live V " In France." — " What city?" " Paris." — " What street ?" " Rue Neuves des Petits Champs, No. 9."—" The name of his father-?" " Gustave Jules." — " What is he ?" " A tailor." — " At what age did he die ?" " At the age of eleven years." — " How long ago V " He does not know." — " When he died, what effect did that create in him?" "None; he found himself forthwith high, very high, then he entered paradise." — " What is paradise ?" " 'T is the same thing as heaven." — " Is there a hell ?" " Yes, but far, very far from heaven." — " What do we do in this hell ?" " We burn there." — " Has Ais seen hell ?" " No ; never." — ■ " He told you that he played in heaven ; with whom ?" " With playfellows and toys." — " Where does he get those toys V* " He desires them, and G-od gives them to him ; but he has not always what he desires." — " When he has no longer a mind for those toys, what does he do with them 1" — "He keeps them, because he can neither break them nor destroy them in any way, as on earth." — " Do children grow in heaven 1" *' Yes." — " Who instructs them V " Comrades more advanced than they." — " How does Ais know that it is God who gives him those toys ? does he see him give them to him V " No ; he has never seen God, who can not be seen by any one : God is a soul that fills the whole universe, who is everywhere, and whom none can see ; but in heaven he i^ represented by a picture whereon is seen a man bound to a cross." — " Is there any night in heaven ]" " Both night and day." — " I have heard say the contrary." ** Those who wish to sleep see night, and those who do not wish to sleep always behold' day." — "How are we dressed in heaven ?" " Every one wears robes." — " What are those robes 1" " They are of all colors, blue, pink, red, green." — "How are the men recognised there?" " They are easily recognised by their fringed girdles." " Do we grow old in heaven ?" " We do ; but we never die again, never, never." — " Are old men to be seen there as on earth ?" "Yes." — " I have heard say the contrary." "Ais will tell us that the next time ; he'll ask his companions, who know more about it than he ; his father told him not to be long." — " His father, then, is dead, tool" *' Yes." — I awake Emile, who, as before, perceives his angel near him an instant.
## 18: Cahagnet (1855) 245 [1e-04]

>She answered : *' Because it was by the permission of God that M. Swedenbo]-g spiritualized, and not magnelized it. It is only material men who magnetize, spirits spiritualize." — " For my part," replied I, " this action seems to me similar to ihe other, since this water has not jjassed to a spiritual state, as we see by our distillations," '' Who tells you that it has not been in the spiritual state 1 Let M. Renard preserve it, it will do him a great deal of good." — '' It was M. Swedenboi-g, then, who took care to eftace the word magnetized ?" " No, he no longer thought of the matter; it is the water itself that carried away this word while filtering through the pores of the glass." — "I can't understand that ; it could not have filtered, or the label would have come off, and the word water would likewise have been effaced. Explain this phenomenon more clearly." " There is no phenomenon : the will and the fluid of M. Swedenborg were in this water, which was not to bear the word magnetized ; consequently the water caused it to disappear," — " You affirm that it was not M. Swedenborg, nor any spirit, that effaced this word ?" " It was the water itself." — " To perform such a work this water, then, has a will % It is alive, then ?" " It had the will and the fluid of M. Swedenborg, that sufficed it." — " Then this is as much as saying that it was M. Swedenborg himself who effaced this word ?" *' He troubled himself no more about it; be content with this explanation. I find myself forced to be so, let every one do as I." My friend wrote word to me that he was cured in two hours ; he applied it, also, to a contusion, the consequence of a fall he had had; at the lapse of a few instants he felt nothing more of it. I looked upon this fact as marvellous enough to take its place in the " Secrets."
## 19: Cahagnet (1855) 49 [1e-04]

>32. Being one day at Colonel R, — 's, I saw a lady who had been magnetized during six months for a malady by this gentleman, and afterward by several somnambulists; she had never slept despite their assurance that she would one day sleep. She begged me, after hearing what had been said respecting me, to try and send her to sleep. In the course of five minutes she slept and was in the state of a; somnambulist. " Why have you not slept until to-day?" "You alone were able to send me to sleep, because your fluid is in much better communication with mine than those of the persons who have hitherto magnetized me." This lady, the wife of one of the first artists of the capital, had received a good education, and, though she had been cured by magnetism, she could not altogether believe in the marvellous effects of somnambulism ; she wished to judge for herself, and this no one was better enabled to do, considering the reiterated physical experiments I made on her. Her speciality was for maladies, and the communication of thoughts ; I magnetized her for some time, and she presented me at one sitting with a scene that I will relate.
## 20: Cahagnet (1855) 92 [1e-04]

>68. M. Mallet is preceded, according to Adele, by a light which she has hitherto perceived only before her mother. I ask this gentleman if lie is disposed to answer a few psychological questions 1 " That depends on the nature of them." — "Have we a soul "?" "You perceive it, since I am one." — "What is the form of itl" " That of the body — that which I at this moment bear." — " Whither does it go after its separation fi-om the body V " Into celestial places." — " What does it do in those places'? — does it eat and drink 1" "It satisfies its principal affections." — "Are there good and bad places'?" " Yes." — " Are the bad ones what Christians denominate hell ?' "Yes." — "Are we burned there, as they say 1" "They say what they do not believe." — " But you were a priest, you youi-self taught this doctrine ■?" "I never believed in it." — " Then what do we do in these bad places, do we suffer there ?" " We satisfy there our affections ; are happy there, although they are places of purification, in which God places us to call us in due time to him, when he forgives us." — " Are they places or sta.tes in which the soul is '?" " Places." — " Do we remain in them for ever V " In the good places, yes ; and, as I have just told you, not in the bad ones." — " In what does the knowledge of the soul consist in those places V " In what it desires to possess, and what it acquires at will." Adele is unwilling to be importunate. I receive these revelations with confidence, because they appear independent of all sectarian calculation, and are of much greater value in the mouth of a priest who has enjoyed an honorable reputation on earth than in that of any other person.
# Progression

## 1: Blavatsky (1889) 409 [1e-04]

>Theo. No, they cannot be so strictly defined in their effects as to show that each individual environment, and the particular conditions of life in which each person finds himself, are nothing more than the retributive Karma which the individual generated in a previous life. We must not lose sight of the fact that every atom is subject to the general law governing the whole body to which it belongs, and here we come upon the wider track of the Karmic law. Do you not perceive that the aggregate of individual Karma becomes that of the nation to which those individuals belong, and further, that the sum total of National Karma is that of the World? The evils that you speak of are not peculiar to the individual or even to the Nation, they are more or less universal; and it is upon this broad line of Human interdependence that the law of Karma finds its legitimate and equable issue.
## 2: Blavatsky (1889) 307 [1e-04]

>Theo. Not once that you have assimilated all the details. For then you will see that for logic, consistency, profound philosophy, divine mercy and equity, this doctrine of Reincarnation has not its equal on earth. It is a belief in a perpetual progress for each incarnating Ego, or divine soul, in an evolution from the outward into the inward, from the material to the Spiritual, arriving at the end of each stage at absolute unity with the divine Principle. From strength to strength, from the beauty and perfection of one plane to the greater beauty and perfection of another, with accessions of new glory, of fresh knowledge and power in each cycle, such is the destiny of every Ego, which thus becomes its own Saviour in each world and incarnation.
## 3: Blavatsky (1889) 367 [1e-04]

>"The theory we are considering (the interchange of ideas between the Higher Ego and the lower self) harmonizes very well with the treatment of this world in which we live as a phenomenal world of illusion, the spiritual plane of nature being on the other hand the noumenal world or plane of reality. That region of nature in which, so to speak, the permanent soul is rooted is more real than that in which its transitory blossoms appear for a brief space to wither and fall to pieces, while the plant recovers energy for sending forth a fresh flower. Supposing flowers only were perceptible to ordinary senses, and their roots existed in a state of Nature intangible and invisible to us, philosophers in such a world who divined that there were such things as roots in another plane of existence would be apt to say of the flowers, These are not the real plants; they are of no relative importance, merely illusive phenomena of the moment."
## 4: King (1987) 442 [1e-04]

>Recall then all our teachings; that death must precede birth, old things must be broken up before the new things can be manifested. And so in yourselves must the same process take place, the breaking up of old ideals that the new ideals may be born and grow, the breaking up of the will, wherein is the self — that self, which though set to do the will of God, seeks to do it in the way of the lower self rather than in the way of the higher self, and long must it be ere the children of the earth can see that such efforts can only come to naught. Yet it is by the very failure of those efforts that they rise to the higher life. Not willingly doth the Supreme (Blessed be He) afflict His children, for in very love are all these failures set as stepping stones to Himself, and the only way to the final goal of Union with Him.
## 5: Blavatsky (1888) 188 [1e-04]

>(b) For it is ... the Twelve Nidânas, or Causes of Being. Each is the effect of its antecedent cause, and a cause, in its turn, to its successor; the sum total of the Nidânas being based on the Four Truths, a doctrine especially characteristic of the Hînayâna System. They belong to the theory of the stream of catenated law which produces merit and demerit, and finally brings Karma into full sway. It is a system based upon the great truth that reïncarnation is to be dreaded, as existence in this world entails upon man only suffering, misery and pain; death itself being unable to deliver man from it, since death is merely the door through which he passes to another life on earth after a little rest on its threshold—Devachan. The Hînayâna System, or School of the Little Vehicle, is of very ancient growth; while the Mahâyâna, or School of the Great Vehicle, is of a later period, having originated after the death of Buddha. Yet the tenets of the latter are as old as the hills that have contained such schools from time immemorial, and the Hînayâna and Mahâyâna Schools both teach the same doctrine in reality. Yâna, or Vehicle, is a mystic expression, both “Vehicles” inculcating that man may escape the sufferings of rebirth and even the false bliss of Devachan, by obtaining Wisdom and Knowledge, which alone can dispel the Fruits of Illusion and Ignorance.
## 6: Blavatsky (1888) 458 [1e-04]

>The student will now be better prepared to see that between the three Upâdhis of the Râja Yoga and its Atmâ, and our three Upâdhis, Âtmâ, and the additional three divisions, there is in reality but very little difference. Moreover, as every Adept in Cis‐Himâlayan or Trans‐Himâlayan India, of the Patanjali, the Âryâsanga or the Mahâyâna schools, has to become a Râja Yogî, he must, therefore, accept the Târaka Râja classification in principle and theory, whatever classification he resorts to for practical and Occult purposes. Thus, it matters very little whether one speaks of the three Upâdhis, with their three Aspects, and Âtmâ, the eternal and immortal synthesis, or calls them the “Seven Principles.”
## 7: Blavatsky (1889) 350 [1e-04]

>This "Higher Self" is ATMA, and of course it is "non-materializable," as Mr. Sinnett says. Even more, it can never be "objective" under any circumstances, even to the highest spiritual perception. For Atman or the "Higher Self" is really Brahma, the ABSOLUTE, and indistinguishable from it. In hours of Samadhi, the higher spiritual consciousness of the Initiate is entirely absorbed in the ONE essence, which is Atman, and therefore, being one with the whole, there can be nothing objective for it. Now some of our Theosophists have got into the habit of using the words "Self" and "Ego" as synonymous, of associating the term "Self" with only man's higher individual or even personal "Self" or Ego, whereas this term ought never to be applied except to the One universal Self. Hence the confusion. Speaking of Manas, the "causal body," we may call it — when connecting it with the Buddhic radiance — the "HIGHER EGO," never the "Higher Self." For even Buddhi, the "Spiritual Soul," is not the SELF, but the vehicle only of SELF. All the other "Selves" — such as the "Individual" self and "personal" self — ought never to be spoken or written of without their qualifying and characteristic adjectives.
## 8: Kardec (1857) 876 [1e-04]

>605. If we consider all the points of contact that exist between humans and animals. Does it not seem as though human beings have two souls, namely, an animal soul and a spiritual soul, and that, if they did not have the latter, they might still live as wild animals? In other words, animals are similar to humans, minus the spiritual soul. Accordingly, the good and bad instincts of human beings are results of the predominance of one of these two souls.
## 9: Blavatsky (1889) 179 [1e-04]

>*In Mr. Sinnett's "Esoteric Buddhism" d, e, and f, are respectively called the Animal, the Human, and the Spiritual Souls, which answers as well. Though the principles in Esoteric Buddhism are numbered, this is, strictly speaking, useless. The dual Monad alone (Atma-Buddhi) is susceptible of being thought of as the two highest numbers (the 6th and 7th). As to all others, since that "principle" only which is predominant in man has to be considered as the first and foremost, no numeration is possible as a general rule. In some men it is the higher Intelligence (Manas or the 5th) which dominates the rest; in others the Animal Soul (Kama-rupa) that reigns supreme, exhibiting the most bestial instincts, etc.
## 10: Blavatsky (1889) 334 [1e-04]

>Theo. Almost so. Remember the practically universal teaching of the two kinds of conscious existence: the terrestrial and the spiritual. The latter must be considered real from the very fact that it is inhabited by the eternal, changeless and immortal Monad; whereas the incarnating Ego dresses itself up in new garments entirely different from those of its previous incarnations, and in which all except its spiritual prototype is doomed to a change so radical as to leave no trace behind.
## 11: Blavatsky (1888) 365 [1e-04]

>(a) This tracing of “spiral lines” refers to the evolution of Man’s as well as of Nature’s Principles; an evolution which takes place gradually, as does everything else in Nature. The Sixth Principle in Man (Buddhi, the Divine Soul), though a mere breath, in our conceptions, is still something material when compared with Divine Spirit (Âtmâ), of which it is the carrier or vehicle. Fohat, in his capacity of Divine Love (Eros), the electric power of affinity and sympathy, is shown, allegorically, trying to bring the pure Spirit, the Ray inseparable from the One Absolute, into union with the Soul, the two constituting in Man the Monad, and in Nature the first link between the ever‐unconditioned and the manifested. “The First is now the Second [World]”—of the Lipikas—has reference to the same.
## 12: Blavatsky (1888) 1973 [1e-04]

>Therefore, if any one is helpless before these immutable laws, it is not ourselves, the artificers of our destinies, but rather those Angels, the guardians of Harmony. Karma‐Nemesis is no more than the spiritual dynamical effect of causes produced, and forces awakened into activity, by our own actions. It is a law of Occult dynamics that “a given amount of energy expended on the spiritual or astral plane is productive of far greater results than the same amount expended on the physical objective plane of existence.”
## 13: Blavatsky (1889) 294 [1e-04]

>Theo. If you want an answer on the strict lines of our philosophy, then I will say that it is because everything is illusion (Maya) outside of eternal truth, which has neither form, colour, nor limitation. He who has placed himself beyond the veil of maya — and such are the highest Adepts and Initiates — can have no Devachan. As to the ordinary mortal, his bliss in it is complete. It is an absolute oblivion of all that gave it pain or sorrow in the past incarnation, and even oblivion of the fact that such things as pain or sorrow exist at all. The Devachanee lives its intermediate cycle between two incarnations surrounded by everything it had aspired to in vain, and in the companionship of everyone it loved on earth. It has reached the fulfilment of all its soul-yearnings. And thus it lives throughout long centuries an existence of unalloyed happiness, which is the reward for its sufferings in earth-life. In short, it bathes in a sea of uninterrupted felicity spanned only by events of still greater felicity in degree.
## 14: Blavatsky (1889) 412 [1e-04]

>Theo. As a general rule, and within certain limits which define the age to which we belong, the law of Karma cannot be hastened or retarded in its fulfilment. But of this I am certain, the point of possibility in either of these directions has never yet been touched. Listen to the following recital of one phase of national suffering, and then ask yourself whether, admitting the working power of individual, relative, and distributive Karma, these evils are not capable of extensive modification and general relief. What I am about to read to you is from the pen of a National Saviour, one who, having overcome Self, and being free to choose, has elected to serve Humanity, in bearing at least as much as a woman's shoulders can possibly bear of National Karma. This is what she says: —
## 15: Kardec (1857) 430 [1e-04]

>If reincarnation does not exist, it means we have only one corporeal life. If the present corporeal life is the only one we are going to have then each person’s soul is created at the same time as his or her bodies. However, if we assume the preexistence of the soul we need to determine the state of the soul before it is united with the body. If the soul existed before the body, we must establish whether this state of being constitutes an existence. There is no middle ground. Either the soul existed before its union with the body, or it did not. If it existed, what was its condition? Did it possess self-awareness? If not, it must have been nearly comparable to non-existence. If it possessed individuality, it must have been either progressive or stationary. In either case, what was its degree of advancement upon uniting with the body? If, on the contrary, we assume that the soul is born into existence at the same time as the body, or that, prior to the birth of the body, it possesses only negative faculties, we have to ask the following questions:
## 16: Blavatsky (1888) 784 [1e-04]

>(a) The Day when the Spark will re‐become the Flame, when Man will merge into his Dhyân Chohan, “myself and others, thyself and I,” as the Stanza has it, means that in Paranirvâna—when Pralaya will have reduced not only material and psychical bodies, but even the spiritual Egos, to their original principle—the Past, Present, and even Future Humanities, like all things, will be one and the same. Everything will have reëntered the Great Breath. In other words, everything will be “merged in Brahman,” or the Divine Unity.
## 17: Blavatsky (1889) 205 [1e-04]

>Theo. The most substantial difference between them and us is this. While we believe with the Neo-Platonists and the Eastern teachings that the spirit (Atma) never descends hypostatically into the living man, but only showers more or less its radiance on the inner man (the psychic and spiritual compound of the astral) principles, the Kabalists maintain that the human Spirit, detaching itself from the ocean of light and Universal Spirit, enters man's Soul, where it remains throughout life imprisoned in the astral capsule. All Christian Kabalists still maintain the same, as they are unable to break quite loose from their anthropomorphic and Biblical doctrines.
## 18: Blavatsky (1889) 572 [1e-04]

>Theo. The reason is simple. Most outsiders knew absolutely nothing of the Society itself, its motives, objects or beliefs. From its very beginning the world has seen in Theosophy nothing but certain marvellous phenomena, in which two-thirds of the non-spiritualists do not believe. Very soon the Society came to be regarded as a body pretending to the possession of "miraculous" powers. The world never realised that the Society taught absolute disbelief in miracle or even the possibility of such; that in the Society there were only a few people who possessed such psychic powers and but few who cared for them. Nor did it understand that the phenomena were never produced publicly, but only privately for friends, and merely given as an accessory, to prove by direct demonstration that such things could be produced without dark rooms, spirits, mediums, or any of the usual paraphernalia. Unfortunately, this misconception was greatly strengthened and exaggerated by the first book on the subject which excited much attention in Europe — Mr. Sinnett's "Occult World." If this work did much to bring the Society into prominence, it attracted still more obloquy, derision and misrepresentation upon the hapless heroes and heroine thereof. Of this the author was more than warned in the Occult World, but did not pay attention to the prophecy — for such it was, though half-veiled.
## 19: Kardec (1857) 316 [1e-04]

>“God imposes incarnation as a tool to reach perfection. For some it is a means of making amends, while for others it is a mission. Every spirit must experience the diffculties of physical existence to reach perfection, therein lies their atonement. Incarnation also requires a spirit to contribute to the work of creation. To fulfll this purpose, spirits assume physical bodies in harmony with the material state of each world to accomplish the missions that have been appointed to them by God. Through these missions they contribute to the general good while also achieving their own advancement.”
## 20: Kardec (1857) 882 [1e-04]

>a) Does the period of humanity begin on Earth? “The Earth is not the first point of the earliest phase of human incarnation; the human period generally starts in worlds that are even lower than yours. This rule is not unconditional and a spirit, upon entering the human phase, may be ready to live on Earth. Such a case, while possible, is uncommon and would be an exception to the general rule.”